<h2>Chapter I. <br/> The Paston Oatvile Dormy-house</h2>

<p>Nothing is ever wasted. The death of the
animal fertilizes the vegetable world: bees
swarm in the disused pillar-box; sooner
or later, somebody will find a use for the
munition-factories. And the old country-seats of feudal
England, that bask among their figured terraces,
frowning at the ignoble tourist down secular avenues
and thrusting back the high-road he travels by into
respectful detours—these too, although the family
have long since decided that it is too expensive to
live there, and the agents smile at the idea of
letting them like one humouring a child, have their
place in the hero-tenanted England of to-day. The
house itself may be condemned to the scrap-heap,
but you can always make a golf-course out of the
Park. Acres, that for centuries have scorned the
weight of the plough, have their stubborn glebe
broken with the niblick, and over-populated greens
recall the softness and the trimness of earlier lawns.
Ghosts of an earlier day will walk there, perhaps,
but you can always play through them.</p>

<p>Paston Oatvile (distrust the author whose second
paragraph does not come to ground in the particular)
seemed to have been specially adapted by an
inscrutable Providence for such a niche in the scheme
of things. The huge Italianate building which the
fifteenth Lord Oatvile raised as a monument to his
greatness (he sold judiciously early out of the South
Sea Company) took fire in the nineties of last
century and burned for a whole night; the help
given by the local fire brigade was energetic rather
than considerate, and Achelous completed the havoc
which Vulcan had begun. It stands even now, an
indecent skeleton, papered rooms and carved
mantelpieces confronting you shamefacedly, like the
inside of a doll’s house whose curtain-wall has swung
back on the hinge. What secrets that ball-room,
those powder-closets must have witnessed in the
days of an earlier gallantry, when the stuccoed
façade still performed its discreet office! Poor
rooms, they will never know any more secrets now.
The garden, too, became involved in the contagion
of decay: weeds have overgrown its paved walks,
and neglected balustrades have crumbled; a few
of the hardier flowers still spring there, but
half-smothered in rank grass, shabby-genteel survivors
of an <i lang="la">ancien régime</i>. For the family never
attempted to rebuild; they prudently retired to the old
Manor at the other end of the park, a little brick
and timber paradise which had served the family for
a century and a half as dower-house. In time, even
this reduced splendour was judged too expensive,
and the family sold.</p>

<p>No need, then, to mourn for Paston Oatvile;
the sanctities of its manorial soil will be as
interminable as golf. An enterprising club, seconded
by an accommodating railway, has invested its
rural solitude with an air of suburbanity; it is
only an hour’s journey from London, and the
distance could be covered in three-quarters of the time
if the club were less exclusive. Bungalows, each
fitted with its own garage, and cottages that contain
billiard-rooms have sprung up in the neighbourhood;
thirty or forty of these, all rough-cast and
red tiles, conceal by a series of ingenious dissimilarities
their indebtedness to the brain of a single
architect. In the middle of these—the cathedral, the
town hall, the market-place around which all their
activities centre—stands the dower-house of the
Oatviles, the dormy-house of to-day. The
committee have built on to it largely in what is
understood to be the same style, and indeed, the new
part is undeniably brick and timber, though in wet
weather the timber is apt to warp and fall off.
It is not only a club-house, of course, it is also
an expensive hotel—if we may call it an hotel,
and not rather a monastic settlement; for the
inhabitants of these pleasant rooms all live for
one end—golf: twice daily they go round the
course, with all the leisurely solemnity of
Benedictines reciting their office, and every night they meet
in corona to discuss the mysteries of their religion.</p>

<p>Which reminds me that I have forgotten to
mention the village Church. There is still a village,
that straggles mysteriously, like so many English
villages, in the form of a hollow square. In the old
days, the Church interposed itself between the
village and the Great House, a kind of mercy-seat
through which the squire could be appeased upon
occasion. Though much older than the Park or the
fortunes of the Oatvile family, it had acquired, from
its enclosed position, the air of a parasitical
institution, an undergrowth of Protestant feudalism.
To-day, it somehow strikes the eye as a by-product
of the golfing industry; people who ask the way
to it (and they are rare) are directed to the fifteenth
green; the service on Sunday is at half-past nine,
so as to allow for the improbable chance of anybody
wanting to fortify himself for the morning round
by divine worship; the sexton will caddy for you
except on the afternoon of a funeral. Conformably
with this, the incumbent of the parish, who is to
figure in this story, was a golfing parson presented
by an absentee squire to a living which offered
few material attractions. He had managed to let
the parsonage, which was more than twenty minutes’
walk from the first tee, and lived in the dormy-house
permanently; arguing, not without reason,
that it was the centre of all the life there was in
the parish. If you are disposed to take a look at
him, you have only to open the smoking-room door;
there he sits, this October afternoon of rain and fog,
with three equally weatherbound companions, a
foursome <i lang="la">in potentia</i>.</p>

<p>He was a man now approaching middle age, a
bachelor and unambitious. You would say that
he had a clerical face—is that clerical face a mark
of predestination, or does it develop by natural
mimicry?—but the enthusiasm which it registered
was, it is to be feared, principally directed towards
one object, and that object a game. He was
mild-mannered, and had been known to keep his temper
successfully in the most trying circumstances, even
at the ninth; no oath was ever heard to escape his
lips, though his invariable phrase, “What <em>tam</em> I
doing?” was held by some to have a relish of
perdition in it. The other three were acquaintances
of his, as acquaintance goes at Paston Oatvile,
where you know everybody’s handicap, nobody’s
politics or religion. One of them, indeed, Alexander
Gordon in nature and in name, could hardly be
known otherwise than by his handicap, for in
politics, in religion, in every subject that could form a
digression from the normal conversation of the
dormy-house, his point of view was entirely
undistinguished and British to the last degree. He
was not, like the others, a permanent inmate, but
was on a holiday visit to his more interesting friend,
Mordaunt Reeves.</p>

<p>Reeves was a permanent inmate, more by force
of circumstances than from any natural indolence.
He had left school at the beginning of the War,
and had been incapacitated for active service by
an extreme short-sightedness which gave his face
a penetrating, not to say a peering, look. Work
had been found for him easily enough in an outlying
department of the War Office, and he was perhaps
a little too fond of beginning his sentences with,
“When I was in the Military Intelligence.” The
picture which the words conjured up to the uninitiated
was that of Mordaunt Reeves concealed behind
the arras with a revolver at half-cock, overhearing
the confidential discussions of German super-spies.
Actually, his business had been to stroll into a very
uncomfortable office at half-past nine in the
morning, where a docket of newspaper cuttings, forwarded
from another department, awaited him. Singling
out some particularly fire-eating utterance of a
Glasgow shop-steward, he would have it typed
out and put in a jacket; then he would scrawl
across it: “Can something be done about this?
Please initial”—and so the document would be
caught up in that vast maelstrom of unregarded
jackets that circulated aimlessly through the
sub-departments of Whitehall. An orphan, with a
comfortable income, he had found himself unable
to settle down to ordinary employment on the
outbreak of peace. He had put several romantic
advertisements into the daily papers, indicating his
readiness to undertake any mysterious commissions
that might call for the services of an “active,
intelligent young man, with a turn for the adventurous”:
but the supply of amateur adventurers was at the
time well ahead of the demand, and there was no
response. In despair, he had betaken himself to
Paston Oatvile, and even his ill-wishers admitted
that his game was improving.</p>

<p>That Mr. Carmichael, the fourth member of the
party, had been a don you knew as soon as he
opened his mouth. There was that precision in
his utterances, that benignity in his eye, that
spontaneity in his willingness to impart
information, that no other profession breeds. A perpetual
fountain of interesting small-talk, he unnerved his
audience with a sense of intellectual repletion which
was worse than boredom. Not that he talked the
“shop” of the learned: his subject had been
Greek archæology; his talk was of county families,
of travels in the Near East, of the processes by which
fountain-pens are manufactured, of county families
again. He was over sixty—he, alone of the party,
was married, and lived in one of the bungalows with
a colourless wife, who seemed to have been withered
by long exposure to the sirocco of his conversation:
at the moment she was absent, and he was lodging
in the dormy-house like the rest. It must be
confessed that his fellow-members shunned him, but
he was useful upon occasion as a last court of appeal
on any matter of fact; it was he who could remember
what year it was the bull got loose on the links,
and what ball the Open Championship was won with
three years back.</p>

<p>Marryatt (that was the clergyman, yes; I see you
are a proper reader for a detective-story) rose once
more and took a good look at the weather. The
fog was lifting, but the rain still fell pitilessly. “I
shouldn’t wonder,” he said, “if we had some showers
before nightfall.”</p>

<p>“It’s a curious thing,” said Carmichael, “that
the early Basque poets always speak of the night
not as falling but as rising. I suppose they had a
right to look at it that way. Now, for myself———”</p>

<p>Marryatt, fortunately, knew him well enough to
interrupt him. “It’s the sort of afternoon,” he
said darkly, “on which one wants to murder
somebody, just to relieve one’s feelings.”</p>

<p>“You would be wrong,” said Reeves. “Think
of the footmarks you’d be bound to leave behind
you in mud like this. You would be caught in
no time.”</p>

<p>“Ah, you’ve been reading <i>The Mystery of the
Green Thumb</i>. But tell me, how many murderers
have really been discovered by their footprints?
The bootmakers have conspired to make the human
race believe that there are only about half a dozen
different sizes of feet, and we all have to cram
ourselves into horrible boots of one uniform pattern,
imported by the gross from America. What does
Holmes do next?”</p>

<p>“Well, you see,” put in Gordon, “the detectives
in the book always have the luck. The murderer
generally has a wooden leg, and that doesn’t take
much tracing. The trouble in real life is the way
murderers go about unamputated. And then there’s
the left-handed men, how conveniently they come
in! I tried detection once on an old pipe, and I
could show you from the way the side of it
was charred that the owner of it was
right-handed. But there are so many right-handed
people.”</p>

<p>“In most cases,” said Carmichael, “it’s only
nerves that make people think they’re left-handed.
A more extraordinary thing is the matter of
parting the hair. Everybody is predestined from birth
to part his hair on one particular side; but most of
the people who ought to part their hair on the right
do it on the left instead, because that’s easier when
you’re right-handed.”</p>

<p>“I think you’re wrong in principle, Gordon,”
said Reeves. “Everybody in the world has his
little peculiarities, which would give him away to
the eye of a trained detective. You, for example,
are the most normal specimen, if I may say so, of
the human race. Yet I know which of those whisky
glasses on the mantelpiece is yours, though they’re
empty.”</p>

<p>“Well, which?” asked Gordon, interested.</p>

<p>“The one in the middle,” said Reeves. “It’s
pushed farther away from the edge: you, like the
careful soul you are, instinctively took more
precaution against its being brushed off. Aren’t I
right?”</p>

<p>“To tell the truth, I can’t for the life of me
remember. But there, you see, you’re talking of
somebody you know. None of us are murderers,
at least, I hope not. If you were trying to detect
a murderer you’d never been introduced to, you
wouldn’t know what to look out for.”</p>

<p>“Try it on,” suggested Marryatt. “You know,
the Holmes stunt, deducing things from the bowler
hat, and from Watson’s brother’s watch. Try that
umbrella over there, whatever it’s doing here;
what will you deduce from it?”</p>

<p>“I should deduce that it had been raining
recently,” put in Gordon with great seriousness.</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact,” said Reeves, turning the
umbrella this way and that, “an umbrella’s a very
difficult thing to get any clues out of.”</p>

<p>“I’m glad of that,” said Carmichael,
“because——”</p>

<p>“—only this one,” continued Reeves, ignoring
him, “happens to be rather interesting. Anybody
could see that it’s pretty new, yet the ferrule at the
end of it is nearly worn through, which shows it’s
been used a lot. Inference; that it’s used by
somebody who doesn’t keep his umbrella for days like
this, but uses it as a walking-stick. Therefore it
belongs to old Brotherhood; he’s the only man I know
in this club who always carries one.”</p>

<p>“You see,” said Carmichael, “that’s the sort of
thing that happens in real life. As I was just going
to say, I brought in that umbrella myself. I took
it by mistake from a complete stranger in the
Tube.”</p>

<p>Mordaunt Reeves laughed a little sourly. “Well,”
he said, “the principle holds, anyhow. Everything
tells a story, if you are careful not to theorize
beyond your data.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid,” said Gordon, “I must be one of
Nature’s Watsons. I prefer to leave things where
they lie, and let people tell me the story.”</p>

<p>“There you are wrong,” protested Reeves.
“People can never tell you a story without putting
their own colour upon it—that is the difficulty of
getting evidence in real life. There, I grant you,
the detective stories are unreal: they always
represent witnesses as giving the facts with complete
accuracy, and in language of the author’s own
choosing. Somebody bursts into the room, and says,
‘The body of a well-dressed man in middle-life
has been found four yards away from the north
end of the shrubbery. There are marks of violence
about the person of the deceased’—just like a
reporter’s account of an inquest. But in real life
he would say, ‘Good God! A man’s shot himself
on the lawn’—leaping at once, you see, from
observation to inference.”</p>

<p>“Journalism,” explained Carmichael, “makes
havoc of all our detective stories. What is
journalism? It is the effort to make all the facts of
life correspond, whether they will or no, to about
two hundred ready-made phrases. Head-lines are
especially destructive—you will have noticed for
yourselves how the modern head-line aspires to be
a series of nouns, with no other parts of speech in
attendance. I mean, the phrase, ‘She went into the
garden to cut a cabbage-leaf to make an apple pie’
becomes ‘Apple-pie fraud cabbage-leaf hunt,’ and
‘What; no soap! So he died’ becomes ‘Soap-shortage
fatality sequel.’ Under this treatment, all
the nuances of atmosphere and of motive disappear;
we figure the truth by trying to make it fit into
a formula.”</p>

<p>“I agree with you about inference,” said Marryatt,
disregarding Carmichael’s last remark—one always
did disregard Carmichael’s last remark. “But think
how much of one’s knowledge of other people is
really inference. What do we really know about
one another down here? Fellow-passengers on the
stream of life, that’s all we are. Take old
Brotherhood, whom you were mentioning just now. We
know that he has some sort of business in London,
but we’ve no idea what. We know that he comes
down here every night in the week from Monday
onwards, and then from Saturday to Monday he
disappears—how do you know what he does with
himself during the week-ends? Or take young
Davenant down at the Hatcheries; he turns up
there every Saturday evening, and does his two
rounds on the Sunday, and then on Monday he’s
off again into the <i lang="de">Ewigkeit</i>. What do we really
know about him?”</p>

<p>“I should have thought you knew all you wanted
to about Brotherhood,” chuckled Reeves. “Hasn’t
he taken to disproving the existence of God on
Wednesday evenings on the village green?”</p>

<p>Marryatt flushed slightly. “After all,” he said,
“what does that amount to? You might as well
say I know Davenant’s a Roman Catholic. But all
I know is that once in a way he goes over on a
Sunday to Paston Bridge—the priest there knows
something about him, I suppose, but he wouldn’t tell you.”</p>

<p>“I had a very extraordinary experience once,”
said Carmichael, “in Albania. I had to translate
the confession of a dying man into French for the
sake of a priest who didn’t know the local language.
The priest told me afterwards I was bound not to
disclose to anybody what I’d heard.”</p>

<p>“He didn’t know you, anyhow, Carmichael,”
suggested Reeves.</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact, I’ve never mentioned what
he said to anybody, though it was sufficiently
curious.”</p>

<p>“It’s impossible,” resumed Reeves, “not to make
inferences; the mistake is to depend on them.
In ordinary life, you have to take risks; you have
to sit down in the barber’s chair, although you
know it is just as easy for him to cut your throat
as to shave you. But in detection one should take
no chances, give no one the benefit of the doubt.
Half of the undetected crimes in the world are due
to our reluctance to suspect anybody.”</p>

<p>“But surely,” urged Marryatt, “you would allow
character to go for something? I was a
schoolmaster once, and while one knew the little beasts
were capable of almost anything, one did clear
some people of suspicion on mere character.”</p>

<p>“But there again,” argued Gordon, “you knew
them very well.”</p>

<p>“Not really,” said Marryatt. “A perpetual war
of mutual deception is kept up between
schoolmasters and schoolboys. One trusted, I think,
one’s unconscious impressions most.”</p>

<p>“If I were a detective,” persisted Reeves, “I
would suspect my own father or mother as soon
as anybody else. I would follow up every clue,
blinding myself deliberately to the thought, where
does this point to?”</p>

<p>“Then you would be unreasonable,” said Gordon.
“In the old days, when the answers of sums used
always to come out to an integral number—I
believe it’s all different now—one was wiser than
that. If you could see that the answer was going
to involve two-thirds of a policeman, you argued
at once that you were on the wrong track; you
started again, and suspected your working.”</p>

<p>“But real life,” retorted Reeves, “doesn’t always
work out to a simple answer. And if the policeman
who’s in charge of a case argues as you’re arguing,
he’s only himself to blame for it if he gets trisected
by the criminal before he’s finished.”</p>

<p>“At least you must respect the principle
of <i lang="la">Cui bono</i>?”</p>

<p>“It’s extraordinary,” began Carmichael, “how
many people make the old mistake about the
meaning of——”</p>

<p>“<i lang="la">Cui bono</i> is the worst offender of the lot,” said
Mordaunt Reeves cheerfully. “Look at those two
boys in America who murdered another boy just to
find out what it felt like.”</p>

<p>“But that was pathological.”</p>

<p>“And how many crimes aren’t pathological, if
it comes to that?”</p>

<p>“I was on Holy Island once for a month,” said
Carmichael, “and would you believe it, there was
a man there that was sick if he ever caught sight
of a dog? Sick, positively.”</p>

<p>“What do you think it really feels like,” asked
Marryatt, “to have murdered a man? I mean,
murderers in general always seem to lose their heads
when the thing is actually done, and give
themselves away somehow. But one would have thought,
if the thing is planned with proper deliberation,
one’s feeling would be that things were working out
according to plan, and the next thing was to get
clear—above all things, to see plenty of people, and
to behave quite naturally in company.”</p>

<p>“Why that?” asked Gordon.</p>

<p>“To establish your alibi. People are often
careless about that.”</p>

<p>“By the way,” asked Carmichael, “did you bring
a paper with you down from London? I’m
interested to see the verdict in that Stanesby case. The
young fellow is connected, I hear, with the
Stanesbys of Martington.”</p>

<p>“Afraid I left London at three, and that’s too
early for anything but betting tips. I say, you
fellows, it’s stopped raining.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch02">

<h2>Chapter II. <br/> In the Rough</h2>

<p>The view from the third tee was one which
even a golfer might pause to admire.
Let the Wordsworthian say what he will,
railways ennoble our landscape; they give to our
unassuming valleys a hint of motive and
destination. More especially, a main line with four
tracks pillowed on a sweep of tall embankment,
that cannot cross a meandering country stream
without a stilt-walk upon vast columns of
enduring granite, captivates, if not the eye, at least the
imagination. Such was the railway that stretched
far into the distance, paralleling the course of
your drive on the right: such was the great
viaduct, some hundred feet ahead of you, that spanned
laboriously, over four giant arches, the little
river Gudgeon, most insignificant of streams.
Shallow and narrow it ran, fringed by willow-herb
and meadow-sweet, a paddling-place for cows
and for unoccupied caddies. Here and there it
threw out a patch of osiers—one in particular, that
nestled at the foot of the railway-arches, was
especially dreaded by golfers. In front, just visible
above the railway where it receded northwards, were
the thatched and tiled roofs of Paston Whitchurch,
the next station down the line. To the right lay the
old house, in its melancholy grandeur, behind it the
village and church of Paston Oatvile. A superb
avenue of elms connected the old house with the
road between the two villages. The sun had newly
come out, showing grass the greener and earth the
browner for the late rain; elemental scents of turf
and furrow greeted its restoration.</p>

<p>It may be doubted whether Mordaunt Reeves was
particularly sensitive to such influences; if he was, it
may have been this distraction which made him slice
his drive. The ball dwindled down the gradual
slope towards the river; cleared in a couple of
bounds the tussocks of thick grass that dotted the
little valley, and buried itself at last in the osier
bed at the foot of the arches. Gordon and he—they
were partners—set out at once to retrieve it,
distrusting the efforts of an inefficient caddie, who
was nearer the spot. It was only a closer view that
showed how well-chosen a lair was this for a
golf-ball hard pressed in the chase. The ground was all
tussocks of rank grass, with hidden runlets that made
islands of them; stubborn little shoots of willow
arrested the searching club. They might have spent
a full half-hour in vain scrutiny, had not Reeves’s
eye lighted suddenly on something he never looked
to find there, a darker patch among the surrounding
green, close to the foot of the first arch. It showed
the outlines of a man.</p>

<p>A dog sleeps on the alert, with the visible threat
of waking at any moment. A man’s sleep is like
the sleep of the horse; it imitates death. Reeves’s
first idea was that this man who lay so still must
be a tramp who had strayed off the London high-road,
and was taking his siesta in the lee of the
viaduct. Then a gleam of more than military
intelligence assured him that on such an afternoon
of downpour a man composing himself to sleep
would have been under the arch, not by the side
of it. “Hello!” he shouted uneasily to Gordon,
“looks as if there was something wrong here.”
Together they approached the prostrate body; it
lay face downwards, and there was no movement of
life. The thrill of distaste with which healthy
nature shrinks from the sight of dissolution seized
both of them. Gordon had served three years in
the army, and had seen death; yet it was always
death tricked out in the sacrificial garb of khaki;
there was something different about death in a
town-coat and striped grey trousers—it was a discord
in the clear weather. The sun seemed to lose a
shade of its brightness. Together they bent, and
turned the body over, only to relinquish it again by
a common instinct. Not only did the lolling head
tell them that here the architecture of the human
frame had been unknit; the face had disappeared,
battered unrecognizably by some terrible and
prolonged friction. They looked upwards, and knew
at once that the sloping buttress of the arch, all of
rough granite, must have intercepted a fatal fall,
and added to its horror. Little about the head
could be distinguished except closely-cut grey hair.</p>

<p>“Poor devil,” said Gordon huskily. “Down from
the line, I suppose.”</p>

<p>“I say,” said Reeves, “we mustn’t let the caddie
see this. Send him across to fetch the other two.”
Marryatt and Carmichael were now close behind
them, and came up almost immediately.</p>

<p>“Is there somebody dead?” asked Marryatt. “I
say, how awful.” He kept on walking up and down
as if thoroughly unnerved, repeating to himself,
“How awful.” Carmichael, for once, was dumb.
It was a new voice that summed up the situation,
in the words, “ ’E’s got ’is properly, ain’t ’e?” and
they turned round to find the caddie obviously
enjoying a new sensation.</p>

<p>“Look here, we must move this somehow,”
suggested Gordon. “What about the tool-house under
that arch?”</p>

<p>“I’m not quite sure I could lift it,” said Reeves.</p>

<p>“That’s all right, sir,” said the caddie, “I’ll
whistle across to Ginger; in the scouts ’e was; they
teach ’em what to do with bodies and that. ’Ere,
Ginger!” and as his fellow-caddie approached,
“Bloke fell off of the railway-line and smashed
hisself up something cruel.” Ginger whistled: “Dead,
is ’e?” “Not half ’e ain’t; shamming, that’s what ’e
is; go and ’ave a look at ’im.”</p>

<p>Ginger satisfied his curiosity on the point; and
these two cold-blooded young persons proceeded
to hoist the body on to an ingenious arrangement
of sticks, and so carried it off, under Gordon’s
directions, to the tool-house.</p>

<p>As the spell of the uncanny presence was
removed, Reeves’s horrified embarrassment ebbed
from him a little, and left him with the sense that
he ought to take command of the proceedings.</p>

<p>“Where’s Beazly likely to be?” he asked—Beazly
was the doctor.</p>

<p>“He went out in the rain,” said Marryatt; “I
should say he’d be about the tenth or eleventh by
now. Look here, I’ll nip across and get him,” and
in a moment he was running across the fairway.</p>

<p>“Seemed glad to get away,” said Reeves; “well,
it’s too late for visiting the sick, and too soon for
burying the dead. Carmichael, you’re looking a
bit on edge, too; would you mind going across to
Paston Whitchurch station and ’phoning up the
police? Binver, I suppose, is the nearest place to
get a bobby from. You will? Good.” And as
Carmichael too made off, “Look here, Gordon, what
are we going to do about it? I’ve got the feeling
that there’s something wrong here. What do you
say to doing a bit of detective work on our
own—or are you feeling rotten?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I’m feeling all right,” said Gordon, “only
what about the police? Won’t they want to look
through the man’s things first? It would be
awkward if we put ourselves on the wrong side of the
law. Funny thing, I’ve no idea whether there’s any
law against searching a dead body; yet, if there
isn’t, how do the police ever get their clues?”</p>

<p>“Oh, rot, the police can’t be here for a good
half-hour, and Beazly won’t mind if he comes along.
Let’s take a bit of a look round, anyhow. He fell
off the arch, and smashed up his face against the
buttress, that looks pretty clear. Now, did he fall
off the line, or off a train?”</p>

<p>“If you ask me, I should say he fell off the
parapet. I’ve noticed, sometimes, what a long way
it really is from the door of one’s carriage to the
parapet—a man falling from a carriage would never
reach the edge.”</p>

<p>“Ah,” said Reeves, looking up, “but you’re
imagining the train stationary. He would be hurled
forward some way by the impetus, if he jumped off
a moving train. And I should say he could have
started falling down that bank to the right, just
before the parapet begins. He’d roll forwards and
sideways, if you see what I mean, till he got to
where the stonework begins, up there, and then,
plop.”</p>

<p>“I dare say you’re right. Anyhow, we’d better
be quick and look at the body.”</p>

<p>As they went towards the tool-house, Reeves gave
a sudden exclamation. “By Jove, his hat! And
it’s—let’s see—I should say fifteen yards to the north
of the body. Now why?”</p>

<p>“How do you mean?”</p>

<p>“There was no wind this afternoon. If his hat
fell with him, it would lie with him. If it lies a
dozen yards away, that looks as if—as if it was
thrown after him. The considerate fellow-passenger
hardly does that, does he?”</p>

<p>“You mean there’s been dirty work?”</p>

<p>“I mean it looks as if there’d been dirty work.
Now for the tool-shed.”</p>

<p>To search a dead body is not an easy performance,
unless you are in a hurry and have got to
do it. Gordon did most of the work, and Reeves
checked his results for him. The pockets contained
a handkerchief, marked with the name “Masterman,”
a cigarette-case, of a common pattern, containing
a cigarette of a brand smoked by every
second man in the neighbourhood, a half-empty box
of matches, a pipe and an empty pouch, two florins,
a letter and a business communication both
addressed to S. Brotherhood, Esq., and a watch and
chain. They also found, written on the back of the
letter, a pencilled list of goods, as if to remind
a man of his shopping needs.</p>

<p>“It’s a queer thing,” said Reeves, “that watch;
because he’s got one on his wrist too. How many
people, I wonder, carry a stomach-watch as well
as a wrist-watch? It’s stopped, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“Blessed if it isn’t going! An hour fast,
apparently, but going. Good advertisement for the
makers, what?”</p>

<p>“But the wrist-watch?”</p>

<p>“That’s stopped.”</p>

<p>“When?”</p>

<p>“Six minutes to five.”</p>

<p>“What did I say about trains? The 4.50 from
Paston Oatvile would be just passing here at six
minutes to five. How’s that for deduction?”</p>

<p>“Looks all right, anyhow. And, by Gad, here’s
a third single from town to Paston Whitchurch.
Is to-day the sixteenth? Yes, then that’s quite
on the square. Now, stand by while I see if his
clothes are marked.”</p>

<p>But neither coat nor shirt, neither collar nor
trousers bore any mark of ownership. The suit
was from Messrs. Watkins in New Oxford Street,
the shirt and collar were of a brand which it would
be mere advertisement to mention. During all this
time, Reeves was making a transcript of the three
documents, not without a certain sense of intrusion
upon a dead man’s confidence. As Gordon began
to look into one of the boots, Reeves gave a whisper
of warning, and a policeman (for they have
motorcycles even in the police force) came into distant
view. Panic seized the forces of Baker Street, and
(forgetting that they had a perfect right to be in
charge of the dead man’s body) they resumed, very
shamefacedly, their search for the lost ball. It
seemed incongruous somehow, to be worrying about
a golf-ball—ought there to be a local rule about
what happened if you found a corpse on the links?
Certainly the game had been abandoned, and the
caddies, to their great regret, sent back with the
clubs.</p>

<p>“Good evening, gentlemen,” said the policeman,
eyeing them narrowly. It was not that he suspected
them or anybody of anything; he merely sized them
up by force of habit to see whether they were the
kind of people you touched your hat to or the kind
of people you told to move on. The scrutiny
being favourable, he allowed them to slash about in
the undergrowth and watch, with ill-concealed
curiosity, the official proceedings of Scotland Yard.</p>

<p>Scotland Yard did very much what they had
done, only with a splendidly irrelevant
thoroughness. Not only the destination, class, and date
of the ticket had to be registered in the notebook,
but its price—there even seemed to be a moment’s
hesitation about the Company’s regulations on the
back. Nor did the names of the cigarette-importer
and the collar-maker go unrecorded; both
watchmakers, the post-marks on the correspondence, the
date on the florins—nothing escaped this man.
Tired of waiting for the doctor and the inevitable
ambulance, Gordon and Reeves abandoned the
truant ball, and made their way thoughtfully to the
dormy-house.</p>

<p>Wilson, the club gossip, met them at the entrance.
“Heard about old Brotherhood?” he asked, and went
on, before they had time to gasp: “He’s gone
bankrupt; heard it to-day in the City.”</p>

<p>“Really?” said Reeves. “Come and have a
drink.” But if he thought that he too had the
telling of a story, he was mistaken; the door opened
on a well-known voice:</p>

<p>“Yes, sliced his drive badly, did Reeves. A
curious thing, that,—you ‘slice’ a ball in golf and you
‘cut’ a ball at cricket, and it’s the same action in
either case, and yet it’s nothing whatever to do with
the motion of cutting a cake. What was I saying?
Oh yes. Right against the viaduct—did you ever
see the big viaduct they’ve got at Welwyn? A
finer one than ours, even—he found . . .”</p>

<p>Which made it evident that Mr. Carmichael was
telling, in his own way, the story of the day’s
adventure.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch03">

<h2>Chapter III. <br/> Piecing it Together</h2>

<p>If the general accommodation at the Paston
Oatvile dormy-house cannot be described as
cloistral, it must be admitted that the rooms in it
where you can claim privacy are not much better
than cells. Mordaunt Reeves, however, had done
something to turn his apartments into a civilized
dwelling-place; there were pictures which did not
illustrate wings, and books devoted to other
subjects than the multitudinous possibilities of error in
playing golf. Gordon and he had each a comfortable
arm-chair, each a corner of the fire-place to
flick his cigarette-ash into, when they met that
evening to talk over the possibilities of the situation
as it had hitherto developed.</p>

<p>“Everybody,” said Reeves, “if you notice, has
already started treating an assumption as if it were
a fact. They all say it was Brotherhood we found
lying there; they all say he committed suicide
because he had just gone bankrupt. Now, as a matter
of fact, we don’t know that it was Brotherhood at
all. He has not been heard of, but there hasn’t been
much time to hear of him; and nothing is more
probable than that a man who has gone bankrupt should
skip without leaving any traces.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but somebody’s dead; you’ve got to find
a gap somewhere in the ranks of Society to match
our corpus.”</p>

<p>“Still, that’s mere negative arguing. And there
are several points that tell against its being
Brotherhood. In the first place, that ticket. Brotherhood
goes up and down every day; do you mean to tell
me he hasn’t got a season? Second point, if it was
Brotherhood there’s an odd coincidence—he died
within ten minutes’ walk of his own bungalow;
why there, any more than anywhere else on the
line?”</p>

<p>“It’s a coincidence that Brotherhood should be
killed so near his own bungalow. But the murder,
whether we like it or not, has been committed just
there, so I don’t see why it shouldn’t be him as
much as anybody else. However, go on.”</p>

<p>“Third point, the handkerchief. Why should
Brotherhood be carrying somebody else’s
handkerchief?”</p>

<p>“If it comes to that, why should somebody else
be carrying Brotherhood’s correspondence?”</p>

<p>“Oh, Brotherhood is mixed up in it somehow
right enough. We shall see. Next point to be
considered, was it accident, suicide, or murder?”</p>

<p>“You can cut out accident, surely. That would
be a coincidence—somebody carrying Brotherhood’s
letter to fall out of the train by mere accident just
where Brotherhood lives.”</p>

<p>“Very well, for the present we’ll ask Murder or
Suicide? Now, I’ve several arguments against
suicide. First, as I told you, the hat. He wasn’t
alone when he fell out of the carriage, or who threw
the hat after him?”</p>

<p>“There was no mark in the hat, was there?”</p>

<p>“Only the maker’s; that’s the irritating thing
about this business. Hats, collars, shirts, people
buy them at a moment’s notice and pay cash for
them, so there’s no record in the books. And
watches—of course you don’t have a watch sent,
you take it with you, to save the danger of
carriage by post. I’ll try all those tradesmen if the
worst comes to the worst; probably the police have
already; but I bet nothing comes of it.”</p>

<p>“What’s your next argument against suicide?”</p>

<p>“The ticket. That extra four bob would have
got him a first instead of a third. Now, a man who
means to commit suicide doesn’t want four bob, but
he does want to be alone.”</p>

<p>“But the suicide might have been an impulse at
the last moment.”</p>

<p>“I don’t believe it. The place where he fell was
just the one place about here where he was bound
to kill himself, not merely maim himself. That
looks like preparation.”</p>

<p>“All right. Any more?”</p>

<p>“No, but I think that’s enough to go on with.
The probability I’m going to bet on is murder.”</p>

<p>“You’re up against coincidence again, though,
there. Why should somebody happen to murder
Brotherhood on the very day he went bankrupt?”</p>

<p>“You <em>will</em> go on assuming that it is Brotherhood.
Supposing, just for the sake of argument, that
Brotherhood has saved a nest-egg for himself, and
is skipping to avoid his creditors—what better way
of throwing people off the scent than by a pretended
suicide?”</p>

<p>“That is, by pitching a total stranger down the
viaduct.”</p>

<p>“I didn’t say a total stranger. Suppose it were
somebody in pursuit of him, or somebody he
suspected of pursuing him?”</p>

<p>“But he couldn’t be sure that the face would get
mangled like that. It was only one chance in a
thousand that the body should scrape down all along
that buttress on its face.”</p>

<p>“He may simply have wanted to kill the man,
without hoping that the corpse would be mistaken
for him. After all, we’ve got to explain the ticket;
a man who takes a single ticket down here is almost
certainly not a resident here—the half-fare is so
cheap. A spy, tracking him, or somebody he takes
to be a spy tracking him. He stuns the man while
he’s not looking, and then pitches him out. He’s
desperate, remember.”</p>

<p>“Well, it seems to hang together that way.”</p>

<p>“But I’m not at all sure that’s the right way.
I’m not at all sure that Brotherhood isn’t the
murderee, and the murderer somebody unknown—such
a murder might be connected with a bankruptcy,
a ruined creditor, for example.”</p>

<p>“And how are you going to look for the murderer
if that’s so?”</p>

<p>“You’re going to help me. We’re going to have
a little detective holiday, and leave the game alone
for a bit. Of course we must find out all about
Brotherhood first—it’s extraordinary how little
people seem to know about him. I asked four men
in the Club whether he wore a wrist-watch or not:
two couldn’t remember, one said he did, and one
swore he didn’t. But there must be some servant
who looks after his bungalow for him; so I’m going
there to-morrow to pump them.”</p>

<p>“Introducing yourself as Mr. S. Holmes of Baker
Street, or how?”</p>

<p>“No, I shall be the <i>Daily Mail</i> reporter—unless
I run into the real article on the mat. Now, would
you mind following up the Masterman clue?”</p>

<p>“What Masterman clue?”</p>

<p>“There are only two Mastermans in the Telephone
Directory. A man dressed like that would
be sure to have a telephone.”</p>

<p>“But I thought you’d made up your mind it
wasn’t a local person at all, because of the ticket?”</p>

<p>“I know, it’s probably a wild-goose chase, but
it’s the best we can do on that tack. Both are at
Binver; one’s a solicitor and one a doctor. I’ll
give you the addresses.”</p>

<p>“And I’m to go to them and ask them what kind
of handkerchiefs they use? Or should I meet them
accidentally and say, Excuse me, sir, could you lend
me a handkerchief, I’ve left mine at home?”</p>

<p>“Well, you can find out whether they’re dead,
anyhow.”</p>

<p>“And if they’re still alive?”</p>

<p>“Well, scout around somehow. Do anything that
occurs to you. This business ought to be rather fun,
if we exercise a little ingenuity.”</p>

<p>“Meanwhile, let’s have another look at those
documents. We don’t seem to have made much out of
them, and that’s a fact.”</p>

<p>They sat for several minutes in silence, re-reading
the copy Reeves had made of the anonymous letter.
It was undated; the address was in printed capitals;
it had been post-marked in London at starting, and
at Paston Whitchurch on arrival. The content of
the message was a mere series of numbers, as
follows:</p>

<table class="list numbers">
<tbody><tr><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>5</td></tr>
<tr><td>18</td><td>4</td><td>7</td></tr>
<tr><td>21</td><td>2</td><td>3</td></tr>
<tr><td>25</td><td>6</td><td>4</td></tr>
<tr><td>31</td><td>4</td><td>8</td></tr>
<tr><td>74</td><td>13</td><td>9</td></tr>
<tr><td>92</td><td>29</td><td>7</td></tr>
<tr><td>97</td><td>5</td><td>3</td></tr>
<tr><td>113</td><td>17</td><td>13</td></tr>
<tr><td>10</td><td>12</td><td>13</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<p>“Unless they’re sums of money,” said Gordon,
“I can’t make head or tail of it all. And if they
were sums of money, it would be a queer way to
arrange the spacing.”</p>

<p>“Wait one moment,” said Reeves, “I believe
I’ve got the idea of it.” He put his hand to his
forehead. “Yes, that does it. It’s a cipher, of
course, otherwise there’d be something to explain
what it’s all about. It will be a book cipher;
the first figure gives you the page, the second the
line, and the third the word in the line. How’s
that?”</p>

<p>“That’s devilish ingenious,” admitted Gordon,
“but you can hardly prove it.”</p>

<p>“I can practically prove it,” said Reeves. “Look
here, the man wanted to spell out a message in
ten words. There was a book, arranged upon
somehow beforehand. The first few words were
ordinary words, that you could find anywhere on any
page: and naturally, to save himself and the other
man trouble in counting, he took them from the top
of the page, so you get lines 7, 4, 2, 6, and 4 of
pages 8, 18, 21, 25 and 31. The sixth word he
wanted was an obscure sort of word, perhaps even a
proper name. He had to go right on to page 74,
and even then he could only find his word on the
13th line of it. Then the next two words came easy,
comparatively, but the ninth word was a brute, he
couldn’t find it till page 113, and on the 17th line
at that. And by that time he’d got nearly to the
end of the book—a book, then, of only 120 pages
or so probably; a paper edition, I suspect—so he had
to go back to the beginning again, which he hadn’t
meant to do.”</p>

<p>“Bravo!” said Gordon. “Have another injection
of cocaine.”</p>

<p>“The curse of the thing is,” said Mordaunt
Reeves, “that with a book cipher you can’t possibly
guess the message unless you’ve got the book. I
think we shall have to establish the identity before
we get any further on that tack. Let’s have a look
at the letter now.”</p>

<p>The letter was a curt official communication from
the Railway Company, only the details being filled
in in ink, the rest a mere printed form:</p>

<blockquote class="form"><div>

<p class="heading">London Midland and Scottish Railway.</p>
<p class="date">10. 10. 19XY.</p>

<p class="boilerplate">Dear Sir,</p>

<p>I beg to acknowledge receipt of your letter of 9th
instant and have given orders for a berth to be reserved
in the sleeping car attached to the 7.30 train on Thursday
(corrected to Wednesday) the 18th (corrected to 17th) of
October to Glasgow. I note that you will join the train
at Crewe.</p>

<p class="boilerplate">S. Brotherhood Esq.</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>“These corrections are rummy,” said Reeves. “I
wonder if perhaps Brotherhood’s letter corrected
itself in a postscript? You see, assuming that
Brotherhood was skipping, it’s all right for him to go
to Glasgow—rather ingenious, in fact—but why
shouldn’t he travel to-night, the sixteenth, instead
of to-morrow night?”</p>

<p>“He couldn’t get away early enough. Or could
he? Got a Bradshaw?” Gordon proceeded to look
up the trains with an irritating thoroughness, while
Reeves danced with impatience—there is no
impatience like that engendered by watching another
man look up Bradshaw. “That’s all right,” said
Gordon at last. “In order to catch the Scottish
train at Crewe he’d have had to take that earlier
train, the one Marryatt came up by, and get out at
Binver. He took the 3.47, I suppose, because he
couldn’t get away sooner. Perhaps, if we’re right
in thinking he wanted to skip, he was going to go
across country by car to-morrow and confuse his
tracks a bit.”</p>

<p>“The thing doesn’t look like skipping quite as
much as it did. For Heaven’s sake let’s beware of
prejudicing the case. Anyhow, he meant to make
for Glasgow on the Wednesday night—that’s
to-morrow night, isn’t it? Now let’s have one more
look at that silly list that was on the back of the
anonymous letter.”</p>

<p>The list had been copied almost in facsimile, for
it was very short. It ran</p>

<table class="list">
<tbody><tr><td>Socks</td></tr>
<tr><td>vest</td></tr>
<tr><td>hem</td></tr>
<tr><td>tins—</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<p class="noindent">at least, that was the general impression it gave,
but the writing was so spidery as to make it very
doubtful which precise letter each of the strokes
represented.</p>

<p>“I suppose it must be a shopping-list of some
sort. If one could make that last word ‘ties’ it
would read better,” said Gordon.</p>

<p>“But even so you wouldn’t have hems in a
shopping-list.”</p>

<p>“It might be ham.”</p>

<p>“But one doesn’t buy ham at the hosier’s.”</p>

<p>“And why did he write at the edge of the paper
like that?”</p>

<p>“If it comes to that, who was the he? It’s not
Brotherhood’s writing—I’ve verified that from the
club book. I fancy this goes pretty deep. Look
here, here’s a bit of detection for you. That sheet
has been torn off at the left-hand side, hasn’t it?
Now, was it torn off before or after the writing was
put on it?”</p>

<p>“Before, surely. Otherwise the initial letters
wouldn’t be so complete; he’d have been certain to
tear across them.”</p>

<p>“I’m not so sure. Who writes so close to the
edge of a piece of paper as that? Remember, I
copied the thing down exactly, and each word was
close up against the tear.”</p>

<p>“I don’t quite see what difference it makes,
anyhow,” objected Gordon.</p>

<p>“More than you think, perhaps. I shouldn’t
wonder if this bit of paper turned up trumps, when
we’ve thought it over a bit more. But there’s one
thing that fairly beats me.”</p>

<p>“What’s that?”</p>

<p>“Those two watches. It doesn’t seem to me to
make any sense. Well, we’d better get to bed and
sleep over it.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch04">

<h2>Chapter IV. <br/> Endless Clues</h2>

<p>There is no surer soporific than sleeping over
a problem, no more fallacious method of
attempting a solution. After murmuring
to himself three times, “Let’s see; there was
something about watches,” Mordaunt Reeves fell into
a sleep which anybody but a psychoanalyst would
have called dreamless. He woke in the morning
with a strong resolution to do the ninth in four,
which melted through lazy stages of half-awareness
into the feeling that there was something else to do
first. The adventures of yesterday, the duties of
to-day, returned to him. He was already nearly
dressed when he remembered that he had decided
on the rôle of a <i>Daily Mail</i> reporter for his
morning’s investigation, and grimly set himself to
remove again the bulging knickerbockers and the
hypocritical garters of his kind. Dressy they might
be, but they were not Fleet Street. His memories of
the reporter’s wardrobe were, it must be confessed,
somewhat disordered, and he was greeted in the
breakfast-room with flippant inquiries whether he
had gone into mourning for the Unknown Passenger.</p>

<p>He found Gordon already at table with
Marryatt—Marryatt in the high clerical collar which was
irreverently known to his intimates as “New every
morning.”</p>

<p>“Well, how are you feeling?” he asked. “You
looked rather chippy yesterday. However, I
suppose it brings a job of work your way.”</p>

<p>“Confound it,” said Marryatt, “that’s the trouble.
The jury at the inquest are bound to bring in
suicide; and then I can’t bury the man in the
churchyard, and all the villagers will say I refused out of
spite, because the poor old chap used to give these
atheist lectures on the village green.”</p>

<p>“Rot!” said Gordon; “if they do find suicide,
they’ll certainly say he was of unsound mind.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” echoed Reeves, “if they do bring in
suicide.”</p>

<p>“But surely you can’t doubt it,” urged Marryatt
energetically. “The man’s just gone bankrupt, and
it was an ugly case, from what I hear; several
innocent people who’d been fools enough to believe
in him left in the cart. At the same time, the
smash came very suddenly, and that makes it
unlikely that anybody could want to murder the man
so soon. Oh, you’ll find it’s suicide right enough.”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Reeves a little stiffly, “we’re going
to do our best to find out between us. I’ve the
greatest respect for the police as a body, but I
don’t think they’re very good at following up clues.
When I was in the Military Intelligence one was
constantly putting material at the disposal of the
police which they were too supine or too stupid to
use.”</p>

<p>“Well, good luck to your sleuthing; but mark my
words, you’ll find it was suicide. I’m going to play
a round now to try and take my mind off the thing,
but I don’t believe I shall be able to drive at the
third after—after what we saw yesterday.”</p>

<p>Left to themselves, Mordaunt Reeves and Gordon
arranged that they would meet again at luncheon
and report on the morning’s investigations.</p>

<p>“And look here,” said Reeves, “it’s a belief of
mine that one wants to cover the ground oneself
if one’s to visualize the setting of a crime properly.
So I vote that after lunch we stroll down to the
railway and take a look at the top of that viaduct,
and then take the 4.50 from Paston Oatvile to
Paston Whitchurch so as to picture the whole thing
exactly as it happened.” And so they parted,
Reeves walking to Brotherhood’s bungalow, close to
Paston Whitchurch station, while Gordon mounted a
motor-bicycle and set out for Binver, a sleepy
market town of some importance as a railway junction,
about twelve miles off.</p>

<p>Mr. Brotherhood’s housekeeper, Mrs. Bramston,
had something of the airs of a landlady. She spoke
painfully correct English, far more terrible than
the native cockney which it half revealed and half
concealed. She commenced where others began,
closed doors where others shut them, and recollected
instead of remembering. Her final consonants were
all sibilant, and seemed to form part of the succeeding
word. She was a merciless and largely irrelevant
talker, and the opportunity of a stranger’s visit
delighted her, self-importance easily triumphing over
any regret she may have felt for the apparently
deceased. She had no doubt that Reeves was a
reporter, but it is probable that she would have
opened out quite as readily if he had announced
himself as the piano-tuner.</p>

<p>“From the <i>Daily Mail</i>? To be sure, sir. I’m
always fond of looking at a paper myself, and as
for the <i>Daily Telegraph</i>, I simply revel in it. Called
about poor Mr. Brotherood, I suppose; well, there
isn’t much doubt what’s come to him, poor soul. . . .
Not Mr. Brotherood at all? Don’t you delude
yourself, young man; that’s him, sure enough. The
police, they wanted me to go and look at the corpse;
but I didn’t hardly like to; battered they say it was,
something shocking. His clothes? Of course they
were his clothes; you don’t think he’d want to be
putting somebody else’s clothes on to commit suicide
in, do you? That’s the same as he always wore;
plain black coat and grey striped trousers, just the
same as it was in the papers. . . . What tailor he
went to? No, I couldn’t rightly say that; though
I’ve had the folding of them many a time; very
neat man he was, Mr. Brotherood, in his personal
habits. Oh, I dare say there’s others as have clothes
like his, only you see the way I look at it is, if the
clothes were <em>on</em> Mr. Brotherood, then it’s Mr.
Brotherood’s clothes they’ll be, that’s the way I look
at it.</p>

<p>“A single gentleman? Yes, a single gentleman
he was, single and singular, if you’ll pardon
the <i lang="fr">jeu de mots</i>. Very singular in his habits. Every
Saturday off he’d go, just the same as it was in the
papers, and where he went to is more than I can
say, though I’ve been looking after him the best
part of a year now. Every afternoon from Monday
to Saturday he’d come home by the five o’clock
train, and then he’d go for his round of golf, and
I’d have a bit of cold supper ready for him when he
came home. . . .</p>

<p>“No, I can’t say that I’ve noticed anything
strange about him of late. You see, he was always
a very reserved gentleman, Mr. Brotherood was;
very silent, if you understand what I mean, in
conversation.” (Reeves felt that this was probably
a characteristic common to most of Mrs. Bramston’s
interlocutors.) “Time and again he’s said to me
would I mind leaving him now because he’d got a
great deal to do. I recollect about a fortnight
ago he did seem rather put out about not being able
to find his overcoat when he went out to deliver his
address to the villagers; but I found it for him. . . .
No, it isn’t much more than two months ago since
he commenced exhorting. I never could see what
he did it for; not that I go to church myself, but
you see the way I look at it is if people want to go
to church why not let them go to church? Live and
let live, that’s what I say. I shouldn’t call myself
a religious woman, mind you, but I like to see
everyone go their own way, and not leave tracts. Miss
Frobisher she used to come here with tracts, but
I said to her, ‘Miss Frobisher,’ I said, ‘you’re
wasting your time leaving tracts here,’ and so she
was. . . .</p>

<p>“Mad, sir? Oh dear no, not what you could call
mad. Of course we all have our own little ways,
haven’t we, sir? and as I was telling you, Mr.
Brotherood was singular, but not demented; I
should never have stopped with Mr. Brotherood had
he been demented. . . . Suicide? Of course it was
suicide; and there’s some say Mr. Marryatt won’t
bury him in holy ground, don’t they? Well, you
take my word for it, Mr. Brotherood wouldn’t mind
about a little thing like that. Some people seem not
to mind <em>what</em> happens to them once they’re gone:
Mr. Bramston was like that, while he was spared
to me; never seemed to mind if we were to take a
spade and bury him in the back garden, that’s the
way <em>he</em> looked at it. But of course, I wouldn’t have
that, and he was buried properly in holy ground,
Mr. Bramston was, and the minister recited the
service over him beautiful. . . . What, must you be
going already, sir? Well, I’m sure it’s been a great
privilege to me to afford you information. Good
morning, sir.”</p>

<p>This is an abridged account of the interview, but
it contains all the material disclosures made by
Mrs. Bramston. Reeves found himself pitying the
coroner who would have to face and to stem that
seething torrent of conversation. He came back
to the dormy-house to find that it was already nearly
time for luncheon, and Gordon was waiting for him,
returned from his errand at Binver.</p>

<p>“Well, have you found out anything?” asked
Gordon.</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Reeves, “I’ve found a wife for
Carmichael. I’ve found a woman who could give him
a stroke a hole at back-chat.” And he launched
into a description of Mrs. Bramston’s voluminous
utterance and her insignificant contribution to the
solving of the mystery.</p>

<p>“Had you any better luck?” he went on.</p>

<p>“Acting upon instructions received, I proceeded
first of all to the offices of Messrs. Masterman,
Formby and Jarrold, Solicitors. It’s one of those
jolly old Queen Anne houses facing on the High
Street; with a flagged walk up to the front door
and blue gates that need painting—or rather, it
would spoil them if you did. It’s been turned into
an office, and the inside is all musty and smells of
decaying paper. The mustiest thing there was the
old clerk I went up to and asked if I could see Mr.
Masterman. And he said, ‘I’m afraid not, sir;
Mr. Masterman is dead.’ ”</p>

<p>“Dead? How? When?”</p>

<p>“My very words. And the old gentleman said,
‘About twenty-three years ago. Would you like to
see Mr. Jarrold?’ Well, that did me in rather,
because even if old Masterman did bequeath his
handkerchiefs to Jarrold, it isn’t likely that old Jarrold
would be still using them, though they would about
match his furniture if he did.”</p>

<p>“How did you get out of it? You were rather
badly placed.”</p>

<p>“I was, and I cursed you pretty freely. However,
I extricated myself without any heart-to-heart
talks with Mr. Jarrold. I just said, ‘I’m so sorry,
I must have made some mistake; this is <em>Doctor</em>
Masterman’s house, isn’t it?’ That killed two birds
with one stone, I eluded suspicion and also got
directed to the other Masterman house, a big house,
the man said, at the other end of the water-meadow
behind the church.”</p>

<p>“So you went on there?”</p>

<p>“No; it occurred to me that a man who lived
in a house that size probably kept a man-servant
or two, and it was up to me to personate one of
them. So I went round to the Binver Steam
Laundry, where I’m not known personally; and said I
was from Dr. Masterman’s, and could they be kind
enough to inform Dr. Masterman as to what action
they intended taking about the twelve last
handkerchiefs that hadn’t come back from the wash. That
sounds risky, but it wasn’t really, because all men
think they’ve more clothes at the wash than they
really have. The lady in charge was quite patient
and kind, obviously well accustomed to that sort of
complaint; she said all Dr. Masterman’s
handkerchiefs had been sent back. Fortunately I bluffed,
and insisted upon a search; after a bit she came and
put into my hands a pile of handkerchiefs, which I
took away with me. There were five of them, four
Mastermans and a Brotherhood.”</p>

<p>“Oh! That rather looks as if——”</p>

<p>“Exactly; it looks as if we ought to have
recognized the touch of the Binver Steam Laundry. In
fact, it would be very suspicious in these parts if
you found a dead man wearing one of his own
handkerchiefs. Well, there seemed no point in keeping
any of them, so I dropped the lot into Masterman’s
letter-box. Unusual, perhaps, but I felt it would
save explanations.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’m sure we’re all very grateful to Mr.
Gordon for his splendid work among the
Mastermen. But it begins to look as if we were left very
much where we were. We still don’t even know
who the corpse was.”</p>

<p>There was a knock at the door, and the unwelcome
figure of Carmichael obtruded itself. “Sorry
if I interrupt,” he said, “but I thought you might
be interested in this poor fellow we found yesterday.
My caddie this morning was giving me the latest
news. It’s extraordinary how these caddies pick up
everything except one’s ball.”</p>

<p>“What news?” gasped Reeves.</p>

<p>“Well, it seems that Brotherhood was insured at
one of these American offices. And they’re a great
deal more particular than our own Insurance people.
And after all they’re right to be: one’s so apt to
think of the Insurance Company as a set of sharks,
when in reality they are only protecting the interests
of their policy-holders.”</p>

<p>“Granted,” said Gordon. “Proceed.”</p>

<p>“Well, as soon as they heard of the bankruptcy
and then saw the news in the morning paper about
the Links Tragedy, the Insurance Company pricked
up its ears. Apparently, in the actuarial world,
bankruptcy followed by alleged suicide is a matter
of daily occurrence, and they have their suspicions.
That is why I say they are quite within their rights
when they insist upon registering a man by his
birth-marks before they insure him. It’s an
extraordinary thing about birth-marks; we really know
nothing about them——”</p>

<p>“Nor want to,” said Reeves, “for the time being.
What happened?”</p>

<p>“I was just telling you. A man came down from
the Insurance Company to identify the corpse; and
my caddie heard about it from——”</p>

<p>“Heard what?”</p>

<p>“Why, that it <em>is</em> Brotherhood. They recognized
him from the birth-mark.”</p>

<p>“So that’s that,” said Mordaunt Reeves, a little
bitterly. “Trust the Insurance people not to make
a mistake. I confess that, after the handkerchief
clue failed, I had begun to think it must be
Brotherhood who was dead. I suppose your caddie didn’t
happen to mention whether it was suicide or
murder?”</p>

<p>“He assumed it to be suicide; but not, I think,
with any inside information. Of course, it was a
foggy day. Did you know that, as a matter of
statistics, there are more suicides in November than
in any other month?”</p>

<p>“I will make a note of the fact,” said Mordaunt
Reeves.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch05">

<h2>Chapter V. <br/> On the Railway</h2>

<p>The afternoon seemed a compensation for
yesterday; October sun glowed temperately
over the links, with the air of a kind old
gentleman producing sweetmeats unexpectedly.
The rich but transient gold of summer evenings
seemed hoarded in this summer of St. Luke; the air
not over-charged with uneasy heat, but lucid and
caressing; the leaves no longer in the shock of their
summer finery, but dignified in the decayed gentility
of their autumn gold. A perfect day for golf, such
was the immediate impression of the Paston Oatvile
mind; but to Reeves a second thought occurred—it
was a bad day for following up the clues of a
murder.</p>

<p>“It’s all very well,” he said to Gordon, “the
visibility’s good, and we shan’t be interrupted by
rain; but we can’t get the atmosphere; the spiritual
atmosphere, I mean, of yesterday’s fog and drizzle.
We shall see where a man fell down the
embankment, but we shan’t feel the impulse of that weeping
depression which made him throw himself over, or
made somebody else save him the trouble. We
haven’t got the <i lang="fr">mise-en-scène</i> of a tragedy.”</p>

<p>They climbed together, Gordon and he; a zigzag
path up the side of the huge embankment, close to
the club-house. When it reached the level of the
line, it kept close to the trim hedge that marked
the boundary of the railway’s property, and so lasted
till the very beginning of the viaduct, where it dived
under the first arch at a precarious angle and came
up the other side. It was a matter of common
knowledge to the good-humoured porters of Paston
Oatvile that the shortest way from that station to
the neighbouring station of Paston Whitchurch was
along the railway line itself—the shortest, because
it avoided the steep dip into the valley.
Accordingly, it was the habit of residents, if pressed for
time, to follow this path up to the viaduct, then to
break over the sacred hedge and walk over the
railway bridge till a similar path was available on the
Paston Whitchurch side. This local habit Reeves
and Gordon now naturally followed, for it gave them
access to the very spot from which, twenty-four
hours before, a human body had been hurled down
on to the granite buttress and the osier-bed that lay
beneath.</p>

<p>“You see what I mean,” said Reeves. “We
can’t, of course, tell what pace the train was going;
they vary so much in the fog. But if, for the sake
of argument, you take the force with which I throw
this stone as the impetus of the train, you see how
the curve of the slope edges it out to the right—there—and
it falls either exactly on the buttress or
next door to it. That’s how I picture yesterday
afternoon—the man takes a good jump—or gets a
good shove, and falls just over the edge; there’s
nothing for him to catch on to; and between his
own motion and the slope of the embankment he
gets pitched on to the buttress. I don’t know any
place along this line where the drop comes so close.
The coroner will call attention to that—it’s
extraordinary the way coroners do draw attention to all
the least important aspects of the case. I read a
newspaper account once of a man who was killed
by a motor-car just as he came out of church, and
I’m blessed if the coroner didn’t draw attention to
the dangerous habit of standing about outside
churches.”</p>

<p>“I must say, the place seems made for something
like this happening. Do you see how the line curves
away from this side?”</p>

<p>“Why shouldn’t it?”</p>

<p>“What I mean is, it would be very hard for anybody
to see Brotherhood fall out of the train unless
he was travelling in the same coach: the other
coaches would be out of view (unless a man were
leaning right out of the window), simply owing to
the curve—and of course a fog would make the
job all the easier.”</p>

<p>“By Jove, that’s true. I must say, I stick to
my murder theory, whatever the jury make of it.
In fact, I hope they will bring in suicide, because
then the police won’t be fussing round all over the
place. It looks to me like a murder, and a carefully
planned one.”</p>

<p>“I’d just like to try your stone-throwing trick
once more. Look here, I’ll lean over the edge and
watch it fall. Only we shall want a bigger stone, if
you can find one.”</p>

<p>“All right. Only they’re all little ones between
the sleepers. I’ll look along the bank a bit. I say,
what the devil’s this?”</p>

<p>It was a sight that on most days would have given
little surprise to the pair; a common enough sight,
indeed, down in the valley, but up here a portent.
Caught in a clump of grass, some twenty yards down
the line in the Paston Oatvile direction, was a
golf-ball.</p>

<p>“That beats everything,” declared Gordon. “I
don’t believe Carmichael on his worst day could
slice a ball a hundred feet up in the air and lodge
it in that clump.”</p>

<p>Reeves was examining the trove intently. “I
don’t like this a bit,” he said. “This is practically
a new ball, not the sort of ball a man would throw
away casually as he walked down the line. A
Buffalo, I see—dash it all, there are at least a dozen
of us use those. Who’ll tell us whether Brotherhood
used them?”</p>

<p>“I say, steady on! You’ve got this murder business
on the brain. How can you tell the ball hasn’t
been there weeks and weeks?”</p>

<p>“Very simply, because it happens to have snapped
the stalk of this flower—scabious, don’t they call
’em—which isn’t dead yet. The ball was right on
top when I found it. I’m hanged if that ball fell
there more than twenty-four hours ago.”</p>

<p>“I say, we ought to be getting back to Oatvile
if we’re going to catch that train,” said Gordon.
“It’s half-past four already, and we’ve got to take
to the path before we come in sight of the signal-box.
The signalman doesn’t really mind, but he has
to pretend to.”</p>

<p>Gordon was one of those men who are always too
early for trains. As a matter of fact they got into
Paston Oatvile station before the 3.47 from London
was signalled. The 4.50 from Paston Oatvile had
to connect with it for the sake of passengers going
on to Paston Whitchurch or Binver, and was still
wandering up and down in a siding, flirting with a
couple of milk-vans and apparently enjoying itself.
The platform was nearly bare of passengers, a fact
on which Reeves artfully commented to an apathetic
porter.</p>

<p>“Not many travelling? You wait till the London
train comes in, sir; there’s always plenty in that as
change here.”</p>

<p>“I suppose it’s the first train people can get away
from business by, eh?”</p>

<p>“That’s right, sir; there ain’t nothing else stops
here after the midday train. Of course there’s the
fast train to Binver, but that passes through ’ere.
You travellin’, sir?”</p>

<p>“Just to Binver. Hullo, there’s the booking-office
opening at last. D’you mind getting two firsts for
Binver, Gordon? Very sad thing that, about Mr.
Brotherhood,” he went on to the porter.</p>

<p>“That’s right, sir; very melancholy thing, sir.”</p>

<p>“I suppose you didn’t see him get on to the
train?”</p>

<p>“There’s such a lot of ’em, sir, you don’t notice
’em, not the ones that travel every day. And Mr.
Brotherhood, ’e was a man as ’adn’t many words
for anybody. Though of course there’s some as is
different; d’you know Mr. Davenant, sir, up at the
Hatcheries? He’s a nice gentleman, that is, has a
word for everybody. I seed ’im getting off of the
London train, and ’e asked me after my bit of
garden—nothing stuck-up about ’im. Excuse me,
sir.” And, as the London train swung into view, he
proceeded up and down the platform making a noise
something like Paston Oatvile, for the information
of anybody who could not read notice-boards.</p>

<p>The London train was undeniably full to
overflowing, and even when the Paston Oatvile residents
had diminished the number, there were enough
waiting for the Paston Whitchurch and Binver train to
leave no compartment unoccupied. Even in their
first-class carriage, it was only by luck that Reeves
and Gordon managed to travel by themselves.</p>

<p>“I say,” began Gordon, “why Binver? We don’t
want to go beyond Whitchurch, do we?”</p>

<p>“Oh, it’s just an idea of mine. We can get a
train back in time for dinner. Don’t you come
unless you’d like to. Steady, here we are.” And
they swept slowly past the scene they had just been
viewing from the solid ground. Reeves opened the
door a little as they passed, and threw out a fresh
stone; he had the satisfaction of seeing it disappear
exactly according to schedule. “Now,” he said,
“we’ve got a quiet quarter of an hour to spend
before we get to Binver. And I’d be dashed glad if
you’d tell me two things. First, how can anyone
have planned and executed a murder in a third-class
carriage on a train so infernally crowded as this
one is?”</p>

<p>“They may have been travelling first. No one
examines the tickets.”</p>

<p>“But even so, look at the risks. We should have
had that fat old party in here if I hadn’t puffed
smoke in her face, and there are very few firsts on
the train. Our man took big chances, that’s certain.”</p>

<p>“And the other point?”</p>

<p>“Why did Davenant come up by this train
yesterday? Of course you don’t know the place as I do,
but Davenant’s a scratch player, and a bit of a
local celebrity. Every child in the place knows that
Davenant only comes down here for week-ends, and
it’s impossible to get a game with him except on
Sunday. Why does he suddenly turn up on a
Tuesday afternoon?”</p>

<p>“Well, I suppose he’s a right to, hasn’t he? I
thought you were saying he has a cottage here?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but one’s bound to notice every deviation
from the normal when one’s trying to trace causes.
Look here, here’s Whitchurch. Do you mind
getting out and calling at the Hatcheries—that house,
there—and finding out, on some excuse, when
Davenant got there, and whether he’s there now?
You’re not known, you see—but be devilish tactful;
we don’t want to put anybody on his guard.”</p>

<p>“Right-o! more lying necessary, I foresee. Oh,
what a tangled web we weave when first we
practise to deceive. So long, Sherlock, meet you at
dinner.”</p>

<p>Reeves’ errand, it appeared when he got to Binver,
was once more with the railway staff. He went up
to a porter, and said, “Excuse me, does this train
get cleared out here? I mean, if one leaves a thing
in the carriage, would it be taken out here?”</p>

<p>“That’s right, sir. Left Luggage Office is what
you want.”</p>

<p>“Well, this was only a paper book. I thought
perhaps you people cleared them away for
yourselves, like the newspapers.”</p>

<p>“Ah, if it was a paper book, we ’aven’t any orders
to take that on to the Left Luggage Office. We
takes those away, mostly; what might the name of
your book be, sir?”</p>

<p>This was not at all the question Reeves wanted,
but he was prepared for it. “It was <i>The Sorrows
of Satan</i>, by Miss Corelli,” he said. “I left it in one
of these carriages yesterday.”</p>

<p>“Well, sir, I cleaned out this train yesterday
myself, and there wasn’t no book of that name. A
passenger must have taken it out with them most
likely. There wasn’t not but one book I found in
those carriages, and you’re welcome to that, sir;
I’ve got it on the seat there.” And he produced a
repellent-looking volume entitled <i>Formation of
Character</i>, by J. B. S. Watson.</p>

<p>Reeves was trembling with excitement, but it was
clearly not a case for showing any enthusiasm.
“Well, give you sixpence for it,” he said, and the
porter willingly agreed—he had guessed rightly that
the sixpence would prove to be half-a-crown.</p>

<p>It was an agony dawdling back by a slow train
to Paston Oatvile, knowing that he could not get
at the cipher-document till he regained his rooms.
Merely as a book, the thing seemed to lack thrill.
It seemed hours before he reached the dormy-house,
and yet Gordon had not returned. So much the
better; he would be able to work out the fateful
message by himself. It could not be a coincidence,
though it had been a long shot to start with. A
book of that length (so he had argued to himself)
would have been the sort of book one reads in the
train. Brotherhood would arrange to have a
cipher-message sent him out of the book which he had
constantly in his hands at the moment. He would be
travelling with it; it was not on the body or by the
side of the line; the murderer might not have thought
of removing it. This, then, must be the book itself.</p>

<p>As he worked out the message he became less
confident. It appeared to run as follows: “Hold
and it thoughts with the I highest and to.”</p>

<p>“Damn,” said Mordaunt Reeves.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch06">

<h2>Chapter VI. <br/> The Movements of Mr. Davenant</h2>

<p>Gordon felt that he was in a favourable
position for inquiring into the whereabouts
of the mysterious Mr. Davenant. He was
himself little known at Paston Whitchurch, since he
had only been a month at the dormy-house, and
his walks abroad had not carried him much farther
than the links. On the other hand, he knew a good
deal, from club gossip, about the habits of Mr.
Davenant. The Hatcheries was not one of the
red-tile-and-rough-cast monuments with which a
modern architect had improved the scenery in the
neighbourhood of the links; it was a substantial
cottage where, in grander days, the home fisherman
of Paston Oatvile Park used to live, and look after
all that was liquid in the property. It was now
occupied permanently by a morose gentleman called
Sullivan, who acted as green-keeper to the Club and
did a little market gardening at home, and occasionally
(that is, during the week-ends) by the scratch
player and mystery man, Mr. Davenant. Legally
speaking, the cottage was Davenant’s property and
Sullivan was the caretaker; actually, it would be a
clearer account of the position to say that Sullivan
rented the cottage from Davenant, and Davenant,
every week-end, became the lodger of his own tenant.</p>

<p>It was, then, as a member of the Club that Gordon
must approach his interview with Mr. Sullivan, and
he was not left much choice of disguises or of
excuses. He decided that on the whole bluff would
pay best. Accordingly, as soon as Sullivan opened
the door in answer to his ring, he began:</p>

<p>“Did Mr. Davenant leave any message for me this
morning before he left?”</p>

<p>“What’s that?”</p>

<p>“I met Mr. Davenant yesterday on the platform,
and tried to make some arrangements with him about
having a game next Sunday, and he said he’d leave
a note for me at the dormy-house, but it isn’t there,
so I thought perhaps he’d left it here instead. Did
he say anything to you about it?”</p>

<p>“He did not. It’s not since Monday morning I’ve
set eyes on Mr. Davenant.”</p>

<p>“But he was here yesterday, surely?”</p>

<p>“He was not.”</p>

<p>“That’s very extraordinary, because I met him on
the train, and I certainly understood him to say he
was coming here. Could he possibly have been
staying at the Club-house?”</p>

<p>“He might.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’m sorry to have troubled you. Good
evening.”</p>

<p>Gordon had the definite impression that when
Sullivan came to the door he was not simply answering
the bell; there had been no time for him to hear
the bell—he had been going out anyhow. There
was a thick hedge at the end of the path which led
to the Hatcheries; and behind this hedge, I am sorry
to say, Gordon concealed himself. He was the most
placid and regular of men, but the ardour of the
hunt was beginning to lay hold of him. It was only
about a minute and a half later that Sullivan came
out, carrying a small bag, and took the path that
led to the links. For a moment the watcher thought
of shadowing him, then decided that it would be
silly. If he went over the golf-links, the open
ground would make it quite impossible to follow
without being noticed; besides, the links would be
full of people whom he knew, and he might easily
get delayed. He resolved suddenly on a still more
heroic course. Nobody else lived in the cottage—why
not try to force an entrance while Sullivan was
out, and satisfy himself on circumstantial evidence
whether Davenant had really been in the cottage or
not?</p>

<p>Breaking into a house is, as a rule, a difficult
proceeding, even if it is your own and you know
the ropes. To break into a stranger’s house, when
you are not even certain whether a dog is kept; is a
still more heroic affair. The door had locked itself;
the ground-floor windows were shut and snibbed.
The only chance seemed to be crawling up the roof
of a little outhouse and through an open window
on the first floor; a bathroom window, to judge by
the ample sponge which was drying on the sill.
With rubber on his shoes, Gordon made a fairly good
job of the outhouse roof. The window was a more
serious proposition; it was very narrow, and
encumbered on the inside by an array of little bottles.
It is easy to put your head and shoulders through
such a window, but that means a nose-dive on to the
floor. To put your legs through first is to court the
possibility of promiscuous breakage. Very carefully
Gordon removed all fragile objects out of range, and
then with extreme discomfort squeezed his legs
through the opening. Even so, there was a moment
at which he felt his back must necessarily break,
when he was just half-way through. Landing at
last without misfortune, he set out quickly on a
tour of the silent cottage.</p>

<p>It was only Davenant’s part of the house that
interested him—the bathroom, a bedroom, a small
dining-room, and a study. They all bore the marks
of recent inhabitation; but was this anything to
go by? Davenant, in any case, would not be
expected back for a week, and Sullivan did not strike
Gordon as the kind of man who would be inclined
to tidy up on Monday when Friday would do just
as well. The bed, indeed, was made; but the grate
in the study had not been cleared of cigarette-ends;
the dining-room table was bare, but Monday’s paper
was still lying across a chair, as if thrown down at
random. On the whole the evidence pointed to
Monday as the day of departure; Monday, not
Tuesday, appeared on a tear-off calendar; a letter
which had arrived on Monday evening was still
waiting in the hall; and there were no clothes left
in the dirty-clothes basket. Such an authority did
Gordon feel himself to be on the subject of washing
since his experiences at Binver that he investigated
equally the clothes which had come back from the
wash, and the list which accompanied them. And
here was a curious phenomenon; the list referred to
two collars, two handkerchiefs, and a pair of socks
as having been disgorged by the Binver authorities,
but none of these seemed to have crystallized in
real life. “Binver is doing itself proud,” murmured
Gordon to himself, “or could it possibly be——”
He went and looked in the bathroom again: there
was the sponge all right, which seemed to insist that
Davenant kept a duplicate series of what the shops
call toilet accessories; but where was the razor, the
shaving soap, the tooth-brush? It seemed, after all,
as if Davenant had packed for the week instead of
leaving a duplicate week-end set behind him.
But—Good Lord! This was still more curious. There
was no soap in the bathroom, although there were
traces of its presence still discernible. Surely no
one packing after a week-end in the country took the
soap with him? The face-towel, too, was gone; yet
the face-towel was distinctly mentioned in the
washing-list. No, decidedly there was something
wrong about Davenant’s exit.</p>

<p>Another curious thing—there was every evidence
that Davenant was a smoker, and yet not a cigarette,
not a pipe, not an ounce of tobacco left in the
study. Of course, it was possible that Sullivan was
very tidy and put them away somewhere, or that
he was dishonest, and treated them as perquisites.
But once more Gordon had the impression that
Davenant had packed like a man who is leaving his
base, not like a man who has just week-ended at a
Saturday-to-Monday cottage. Like a man going
abroad, even, or why did he take the soap with him?
One piece of supplementary evidence was to be found
in the study. A large and highly ornamented
photograph frame stood on the writing-table there; but it
had no photograph in it, and the back was
unfastened, as if the portrait had been recently and
suddenly removed. If circumstantial evidence went for
anything, it seemed clear that when Davenant left
the house last—apparently on Monday—he left it in
the spirit of a man who does not expect to return
immediately, and carries all his immediate needs
with him.</p>

<p>So far the investigation had proceeded, when
Gordon happened to look out of a front window, and
was discomposed by observing that Sullivan was
coming back already down the lane. There was no
time to be lost; he hastily ran downstairs and out at
the front door. It would be taking a considerable
risk to trust to the mazes of the back garden, and
he decided to make for the hedge. But before he
could reach it, Sullivan turned the corner into the
garden-path and confronted him.</p>

<p>“I’m so sorry,” he said, on the inspiration of the
moment, “but could you tell me what Mr. Davenant’s
address is? I shall have to write to him,
and this is the only address they’ve got up at the
Club.”</p>

<p>“Mr. Davenant left no address,” said Sullivan,
and, try as he would, Gordon could not determine
whether there was suspicion in his tone. However,
the awkward corner was turned, and it was with
some feeling of self-congratulation that he made his
way back to the dormy-house.</p>

<p>He came back to find Reeves closeted with
Marryatt and Carmichael, to whom he was explaining
the whole story of their adventures. “I hope
you won’t think it a breach of confidence,” was his
explanation, “but the last disappointment I’ve had
has made me feel that we must be on the wrong
tack somewhere; and it’s no good for us two to try
and correct each other. It’s like correcting the
proofs of a book; you must get an outsider in to do
it. So I thought, as Marryatt and Carmichael were
with us at the start, it would be best to take them
fully into our confidence, and make a foursome
of it.”</p>

<p>“Delighted,” said Gordon. “I’ve been prospecting
a bit, but I can’t say I’ve got much forrarder.”</p>

<p>“Did you ask whether Davenant was there
yesterday?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I interviewed Sullivan on the subject, and
he said ‘No.’ ”</p>

<p>“That I can’t believe,” said Carmichael.</p>

<p>“Why, what about it?” asked Gordon, a little
ruffled.</p>

<p>“I’m sure Sullivan didn’t say ‘No.’ Have you
never observed that an Irishman is incapable of
saying yes or no to a plain question? If you say,
Has the rain stopped, he won’t say Yes, or No; he’ll
say, It has, or It hasn’t. The explanation of that is
a perfectly simple one: there is no native word for
either in Irish, any more than there is in Latin.
And that in its turn throws a very important light
on the Irish character——”</p>

<p>“Oh, go and throw an important light on your
grandmother’s ducks,” said Reeves. “I want to
hear about this interview. Was he telling the truth,
d’you think?”</p>

<p>“From his manner, I thought not. So, when
his back was turned, I made bold to enter the
house and take a look round for myself.” And
he described the evening’s entertainment in
detail.</p>

<p>“By Jove, you are warming to the part,” said
Marryatt. “I should like to see you get run in by
the police, Gordon.”</p>

<p>“You say,” Reeves interrupted, “that you don’t
think he was there yesterday, on the Tuesday, that
is, because he hadn’t taken the letter away. He
went off, then, on Monday, but when he went off
he took with him all that a man normally takes with
him if he’s going to sleep in a different house that
night, plus a piece of soap and a towel, which are
not things one usually carries about in one’s
luggage?”</p>

<p>“That’s the best I can make of it,” said Gordon.
“And the photograph—it might be an accident, of
course, but I feel convinced that he put that in his
luggage at the last moment.”</p>

<p>“And that’s frightfully important,” said Reeves,
“because it obviously means that on Monday,
before anything happened to Brotherhood, Davenant
was reckoning on leaving home for some little time;
and not returning immediately to wherever it is he
lives ordinarily, because he must keep collars and
things there. But he also thought he might be
away for some longish time, or he wouldn’t have
worried to take the photograph with him. What
was the frame like?”</p>

<p>“Quite modern; no maker’s name on it.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid that means the murder must have
been a premeditated one,” put in Marryatt. “I hope
it’s not uncharitable to say so, but I never did like
Davenant. I don’t think I’m ordinarily a person
of very narrow religious views, and I’ve known
Romans that were quite easy to get on with. But
Davenant was a person of quite ungovernable
temper, you must remember that.”</p>

<p>“His ungovernable temper would be much more
important,” objected Gordon, “if the murder were
not a premeditated one.”</p>

<p>“But it’s not only that,” persisted Marryatt. “To
me, there was always something sinister about him;
he had fits of melancholy, and would rail at the
people and the politicians he didn’t like in a way
that was almost frightening. Surely I’m not alone
in that impression?”</p>

<p>“What did Davenant look like?” asked
Carmichael suddenly.</p>

<p>“Good Lord,” said Reeves, “you ought to
remember that well enough. You must have met him
down here pretty well every week-end, and he was
quite well known.”</p>

<p>“Oh yes,” explained Carmichael. “I know what
he looked like. I’m only asking you to see if <em>you</em>
remember. If you were asked in a witness-box,
what would you say Davenant looked like?”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Reeves, rather taken aback, “I
suppose one would certainly say he was very dark.
Very dark hair, I mean, and a great deal of it, so
that it made the rest of his face rather unnoticeable.
What I generally notice about a man is his eyes,
and I never got much impression of Davenant’s,
because he nearly always wore those heavy
horn-rimmed spectacles. And then of course he was a
rattling good player. If he murdered Brotherhood,
as Marryatt seems positive he did, I can tell you
one motive that I can’t accept for his doing it. He
wasn’t jealous of Brotherhood’s golf. Poor old
Brotherhood was about as rotten as Davenant is
good.”</p>

<p>“It’s very extraordinary to me,” said Carmichael,
“that you should say all that, and yet not have
arrived at the obvious fact about this mystery.
The root fact, I mean, which you have to take into
account before you start investigating the
circumstances at all. You simply haven’t seen that fact,
although it’s right under your nose. And that’s
a very curious thing, the way you can look at a
complex of facts ninety-nine times, and only notice
the point of them the hundredth time. The
phenomenon of attention——”</p>

<p>“Oh, cut it out,” said Gordon; “what <em>is</em> the fact
we haven’t noticed?”</p>

<p>“Oh, that,” said Carmichael lightly, “merely that
Brotherhood is Davenant, and Davenant is
Brotherhood.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch07">

<h2>Chapter VII. <br/> Carmichael’s Account of it</h2>

<p>“Good Lord,” said Reeves, when the first
shock of astonishment was over, “tell us
some more about it. How did you
know?”</p>

<p>Carmichael joined the tips of his fingers and
beamed at them, secure of an audience at last.
“Well, you’ve just admitted that all you can
remember about Davenant is hair and spectacles.
That is, his disguise. Of course the man wore a
wig. He was a fictitious personality from start to
finish.”</p>

<p>“Except for his golf,” suggested Gordon.</p>

<p>“Yes, that was real enough; but Brotherhood’s
wasn’t. Don’t you see that the two characters
are complementary, suspiciously complementary?
Brotherhood is here all the week, but never during
the week-ends; Davenant is only seen from
Saturday to Monday. Davenant is Catholic, so as to
be violently distinguished from the atheist
Brotherhood. Davenant is good at golf; so Brotherhood
has to be distinguished by being very bad at golf,
and that, to me, is the mystery of the whole
concern. How a scratch player could have the iron
self-control to play that rotten game all the week,
merely to prevent our suspecting his identity, beats
me entirely. And yet you could find parallel
instances; old Lord Mersingham, for example——”</p>

<p>“Do you mean,” said Gordon in a shocked voice,
“that Brotherhood pulled his drives like that on
purpose?”</p>

<p>“Precisely. After all, don’t you remember that
day, let me see, I think it was last February, when
Brotherhood played for fifty pounds, and went
round in eighty-nine? Of course, there are flukes
even in golf. I remember myself——”</p>

<p>“Well,” said Gordon, “I think the Committee
ought to do something about it. Dash it all, I
was his partner in the foursomes.”</p>

<p>“<i lang="la">De mortuis</i>,” suggested Reeves. “But I still
don’t see why he wanted to do it, I’m afraid. Why,
the thing’s been going on for years.”</p>

<p>“Well, none of us know much about
Brotherhood’s business; but I gather from what people
are saying about the bankruptcy that it was a pretty
shady one. They haven’t traced any hole in the
accounts; but if there ever was a man you would
expect to go bankrupt and then skip (I believe
it is called) with what is described in such
circumstance as the boodle, that man was
Brotherhood. He foresaw the probability of this for years,
and made very careful and subtle preparations for
meeting the situation. The important thing on
such occasions is to have an <i lang="la">alter ego</i>. The
difficulty is to establish an <i lang="la">alter ego</i> on the spur of the
moment. Brotherhood knew better. He had been
working up his <i lang="la">alter ego</i> for years.”</p>

<p>“Right under our noses!” protested Reeves.</p>

<p>“That was the cleverness of it,” said Carmichael.
“If there was a Mr. Brotherhood at Paston Oatvile,
and a Mr. Davenant every week-end at Brighton,
nobody would be deceived; it’s a stale old dodge
to keep up a double establishment in two different
places. The genius of Brotherhood’s invention was
that he kept up two establishments within a stone’s
throw of each other. Nobody here could actually
say that he’d seen Brotherhood and Davenant
together, that goes without saying. But the two
personalities were real personalities in the same world;
and there were hosts of witnesses who would
declare that they knew both. If Brotherhood
suddenly ceased to exist, the last place where anybody
would thing of looking for him would be the house
next door.”</p>

<p>“Good God, what a fool I’ve been!” said
Mordaunt Reeves.</p>

<p>“The separate banking-account would be particularly
useful to such a man,” Carmichael went on.
“If we could find out where Davenant banked, I
have no doubt that we should discover a
substantial balance. But of course, he wouldn’t bank
here.”</p>

<p>“Why not?” asked Gordon.</p>

<p>“Because Brotherhood would want to deal with
the local bank, and it’s a very unsafe business
making your signature in a forged writing. So
Davenant will have banked in London. By the
way, that’s another point, did you notice that
Davenant always used a typewriter? He couldn’t risk
the use of a false handwriting.”</p>

<p>“Elementary, my dear Watson,” murmured
Gordon to himself.</p>

<p>“Well, he knew when the crash was coming; it
was all carefully prearranged. He had even the
impudence to book a sleeping car to Glasgow.”</p>

<p>“But that’s a difficulty, surely,” put in Reeves.
“Because he ordered the sleeper not as Davenant
but as Brotherhood. Now, you make out that
Brotherhood was to have disappeared, as from
yesterday, and Davenant was to have become a
permanency. Why didn’t he order a sleeper in the
name of Davenant?”</p>

<p>“How often am I to tell you, my dear Reeves,
that you are dealing with a genius? If Davenant
had ordered a sleeper just at that moment, attention
might have been directed to him. But ordering
a sleeper for Brotherhood would merely strengthen
the impression that Brotherhood had disappeared.
If that was all—personally I believe the scheme was
even more audacious. I believe Davenant did mean
to go away, for a time at any rate, and by that
very train. He would join it at Crewe, travelling in
an ordinary first-class carriage. Then at
Wigan—bless my soul!”</p>

<p>“What’s the matter?” asked Gordon.</p>

<p>“I find myself unaccountably unable to recollect
whether the 7.30 from Euston stops at Wigan.
However, it will do for the sake of argument.</p>

<p>“At Wigan an anonymous passenger, Davenant,
of course, would ask the sleeping-car attendant
whether he had a vacant berth. And the man was
bound to have a vacant berth—Brotherhood’s.
There was one person in the world whom nobody
would suspect of being Brotherhood—the stranger
who had been accommodated, quite accidentally,
with Brotherhood’s berth.”</p>

<p>“It’s wonderful!” said Marryatt.</p>

<p>“But of course, all that is only speculation.
Now we come to something of which we can give
a more accurate account—the plans which this
Brotherhood-Davenant made for the act of
metamorphosis. I take it this was his
difficulty—Brotherhood and Davenant (naturally enough) do
not know one another. If Davenant walks out of
Brotherhood’s office in London, it will create
suspicion—the change, then, must not happen in
London. If Davenant is suddenly seen walking out
of Brotherhood’s bungalow, that again will create
suspicion; the change, then, must not take place
at Paston Whitchurch. The thing must be
managed actually on the journey between the two places.
That is why Brotherhood-Davenant wears such
very non-committal clothes—hosiery by which, in
case of accident, he cannot be traced; the very
handkerchief he takes with him is one belonging
to a stranger, which has come into his possession
by accident. He even has two watches, one to suit
either character. Thus, you see, he can be
Brotherhood or Davenant at will, by slipping on a wig
and a pair of spectacles.</p>

<p>“He did not do anything so crude as to change
once for all, suddenly, from Brotherhood to
Davenant at a given point on his journey. He alternated
between the two roles all along the line—I have
always wondered what is the origin of that curious
phrase ‘all along the line’; here I use it, you will
understand, in a quite literal sense. Davenant got
out at Paston Oatvile—the porter saw him. But,
as we now know, it must have been Brotherhood
who was travelling in the 4.50 from Paston
Oatvile on. Yet it was as Davenant that he would
have got out at Paston Whitchurch.”</p>

<p>“How do you know that?” asked Reeves.</p>

<p>“The ticket, of course. Brotherhood had a
season, naturally, for he went up and down every day.
At Paston Whitchurch, therefore, Brotherhood
would have produced a season. It was Davenant
who needed an ordinary single. The effect of all
this was to create the simultaneous impression that
both Brotherhood and Davenant came back to
Paston Whitchurch that afternoon, and came by
the same train. There was only one hitch in the
plan, which could hardly have been foreseen. If
Brotherhood happened to be murdered on the way,
it would look very much as if Davenant had
murdered him. And unfortunately he was murdered.”</p>

<p>“Then you don’t think it was suicide?” asked
Marryatt, with a catch in his voice.</p>

<p>“If it was suicide, it was the result of a momentary
insanity, almost incredibly sudden in its incidence.
Suicide was certainly not part of the plan. A bogus
suicide was, of course, a conceivable expedient;
it would have been one way of getting rid of the
undesirable Brotherhood’s existence. But consider
what that means. It means getting hold of a
substitute who looked exactly like Brotherhood—he
could not foresee the excoriation of the
features—and murdering him at unawares. It meant,
further, that Davenant would be suspected of the
murder. No plan could have been more difficult or
more clumsy.”</p>

<p>“Then you mean,” said Marryatt, “that we have
to look for a murderer, somebody quite unknown
to us?”</p>

<p>“I didn’t say that,” replied Carmichael, with a
curious look. “I mean that we have to look for
a murderer, some one whom we have not hitherto
suspected. If Davenant murdered Brotherhood,
that was certainly suicide; for Davenant was
Brotherhood. But that seems to me impossible. The
evidence all goes to show that there was a very
careful plot in contemplation, which was cut short
by a quite unforeseen counterplot.”</p>

<p>“But look here,” said Reeves, “if the original
plan had come off, did he mean to come back here
and live on here as Davenant?”</p>

<p>“You mustn’t expect me to know everything;
I can only go by the indications. But I should say
that he really would have come back here as
Davenant, perhaps about three weeks later, and settled
down permanently at the Hatcheries; or perhaps
even—he was a very remarkable man—he would
have bought up Brotherhood’s bungalow. You
see, he liked the place; he liked the company; the
only thing he disliked was having to play golf badly,
and that necessity disappeared, once he settled down
as Davenant. A wig is a nuisance, but so is
baldness. The last place where anybody would look
for Mr. Brotherhood, last heard of on the way to
Glasgow, would be Paston Whitchurch, where Mr.
Brotherhood had lived.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid I’m very stupid,” said Gordon, “one of
Nature’s Watsons, as I said yesterday. But what
about all the silly little indications I found at the
Hatcheries an hour ago? Do they back up your
theory, or are they wide of the mark?”</p>

<p>“It’s all according to schedule,” explained
Carmichael, “but for a reason quite different from
any you imagined. You must consider that the
things we really find it hard to change are not the
important things of life, our moral or religious or
political standpoint, but our common, daily habits
of living. Brotherhood might be an atheist, and
Davenant a Catholic; Brotherhood a violent
Radical, Davenant a Diehard Tory. But every man
has his own preference in razors and in shaving-soap
and in tooth-powder; and if you looked into the
thing, you would find that if Davenant used A’s
shaving-soap, so did Brotherhood; if Brotherhood
used B’s tooth-powder, so did Davenant. There lay
the real danger of detection. There was just the
danger that somebody—shall we say, an interfering
old don?—might hit upon the truth of the secret,
and make investigations. Accordingly, those little
traces must be obliterated. And they have been, for
Davenant was careful to take them away with him.
And so has the photograph, a photograph which,
I suspect, had a duplicate in Brotherhood’s
house—you see, neither Brotherhood nor Davenant could
live without it.”</p>

<p>“But the collars and the socks? Surely nobody
is so intimately wedded to one particular type of
collar——”</p>

<p>“A blind. Davenant was to look as if he were
packing up to go away, so he must take some
clothes with him, not merely the shaving things.”</p>

<p>“But the towel and the soap? Surely they were
not necessary to complete the illusion?”</p>

<p>“No, they are even more significant. Davenant—don’t
you remember?—had rather darker eyebrows
than Brotherhood. Quite easily done, of course,
with paint. But you want something to wash it
off with; and there are no corridors on the slow
trains.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but look here,” objected Reeves, “why
did he want to take all these things away with him
on Monday?—it was on Tuesday he was timed to
disappear—or rather, actually on Wednesday: his
sleeper was for Wednesday.”</p>

<p>“I don’t think he meant to sleep the Tuesday
night at the Hatcheries. He had transferred his
base somewhere else—to London, I suppose—and
his visit to Paston Whitchurch, on the pretext of
picking up something he had left behind, was merely
meant to establish, in our eyes, the fact that he
was a different man from Brotherhood.”</p>

<p>“There’s one more thing, though,” said Marryatt;
“I’m afraid it’s a kind of professional objection.
Is it possible that a man who was really an atheist
would be at the pains to go over every Sunday to
Mass at Paston Bridge? Davenant, you see, was
very regular about that. Or, granted that he was
really a Catholic, could he bring himself to get up
and preach atheist doctrines on the village green?”</p>

<p>Carmichael pulled a wry face. “I’m afraid,
Marryatt, you are altogether too confiding. Don’t
you see that he was a Catholic, and was doing the
work of his own Church by turning the villagers
against you and your doctrines? Don’t you see that
if he managed to make atheists of your people, it
would be all the easier for the priest at Paston
Bridge to make Romans of them?”</p>

<p>“In fact,” said Gordon, “what it comes to is this:
we have got to look for a criminal still; but it’s
no use looking for Davenant?”</p>

<p>“You would be chasing a phantom,” said
Carmichael.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch08">

<h2>Chapter VIII. <br/> The Inquest, and a Fresh Clue</h2>

<p>The inquest was held on the following
afternoon (that is, the afternoon of Thursday)
in the village school at Paston Whitchurch.
As he sat waiting to give his evidence, Reeves found
his mind dominated, as the mind is dominated at
such moments, almost entirely by irrelevant
sense-impressions. There was the curious smell of the
schoolroom, which always suggests (it is hard to
know why) ink and chalk. There was the irritating
pant and hoot of motors and motor-bicycles
outside the open windows. There was the inevitable
series of animals represented round the walls,
looking like the religious emblems of some strange,
totemistic worship. The one opposite Reeves had a
caption underneath it in very large letters, <b>the pig
is a mammal</b>, as if to clear up any possible doubts
which might be felt by the youth of the parish as
to what a pig was. There were the names cut
and inked on the desks; especially intriguing was
the signature of “H. Precious”—how did people in
the country get such odd names? And why were
there so few names like that in the London
Telephone Directory? Carmichael would probably have
a theory about this. . . .</p>

<p>Such were the thoughts that kept dawdling
through his mind, when he felt that he ought to be
forming important decisions. What was he going to
say when he was called in evidence? Was he going
to give any hint as to his suspicions of foul play,
or would it be better to leave the police to their
own unaided intelligence? And if he did breathe
his suspicions, was he bound to mention the
golf-ball which he had found at the top of the
embankment? Would they ask how he had employed his
time between the moment when he found the body
and the moment when the police arrived? He
wished that he had discussed all this beforehand with
Gordon—or would that have been conspiring to
defeat the ends of justice? Anyhow, he wished the
preliminary proceedings would hurry up.</p>

<p>When he was actually called, he found that he
was not asked for his opinion on any theoretical
point, and indeed was given no opportunity of
getting a word in edgeways as to the view he had
formed of the case. He was only asked details
about the exact time of his discovery (this
question confused him rather) and the precise attitude
in which the body lay. Instead of being criticized
for disturbing the clues by removing the dead body,
he was thanked for having removed it. Altogether,
the proceedings struck him as singularly
ill-calculated to assist in the clearing up of a mystery.
It seemed rather as if Society were performing a
solemn act of purification over the remains of the
dead. In the end he sat down feeling exactly (the
atmosphere helped) as if he were back at school
again, had just been “put on construing,” not at the
passage he had specially “mugged up,” but at the
passage next door to it, and had acquitted himself
better than he expected in the circumstances. The
feeling was intensified when Marryatt got up;
Marryatt was still intensely nervous over the
prospect of a suicide verdict; and he answered the
questions put to him confusedly and at random, like a
schoolboy who has omitted the formality of
preparing the lesson at all.</p>

<p>The heroine of the afternoon was undoubtedly
Mrs. Bramston. The coroner was not ready for
her, and she got right in under his guard, pouring
out a flood of promiscuous information which he
neither demanded nor desired. Then strangers
came—people from Brotherhood’s office in London,
people from the Insurance Company, people
representing the creditors: people, too, who represented
the railway company, and dilated for hours on the
impossibility of falling out of their trains by
accident. In fact, nobody seemed to care a straw about
the mangled temple of humanity that lay in the next
room, or whether it cried to heaven for vengeance.
Only two points mattered, whether the Insurance
Company had got to pay up, and whether the
Railway Company owed Compensation. Brotherhood
had, as far as could be discovered, neither kith nor
kin in the world, and it was perhaps not unnatural
that the verdict given was one of death by suicide.
Yet Marryatt was to be freed of his apprehensions:
Brotherhood had looked worried lately at the office—had
said, “Damn you, get out of the way” to the
lift-boy—had complained of headaches. He had
committed suicide, clearly while of unsound mind;
and Marryatt might get on with the funeral.</p>

<p>Marryatt seemed five years younger when they
met afterwards to discuss the situation. Strange,
Reeves reflected, how in certain natures the wish
is father to the thought. Only last night Marryatt
had seemed eager to follow up the clues of a murder,
so as to get the bugbear of suicide off his mind;
now that the act of suicide was declared inculpable,
he showed no great interest in prosecuting the
inquiry. “It’s a mystery,” he kept on saying, “and
I don’t think we’re ever likely to get to the bottom
of it. If we could have hunted Davenant, we should
have had something to go on. Now that we know
Davenant was a fictitious personage, what’s the use
of worrying? We’ve no clues that can help us to
any further action. Unless, of course, you like to
go to the police and tell them what you know.”</p>

<p>But to this Reeves would not consent. Ever since
the apparent indifference with which the police had
treated his warning chits when he was in the
Military Intelligence, he had longed for an opportunity
to show them in the wrong.</p>

<p>“There are one or two things,” he pointed out,
“which we’ve still got to account for. There’s that
cipher message we found in Brotherhood’s pocket.
There’s the list we found on the back of it; only
four words, but full of suggestion. And there’s the
golf ball we found on the embankment—there we
have the actual clue in our pockets.”</p>

<p>“A precious poor sort of clue,” objected Gordon.
“Leave that ball lying about, and every third man
in the club will be prepared to adopt it as his
long-lost property.”</p>

<p>Carmichael seemed destined to overwhelm them
with surprises. At this point he suddenly remarked,
“You know, that’s not all the clues we’ve got.
There’s one that dropped out of poor Brotherhood’s
pocket as the caddies were carrying off the body
to the tool-house. At least, the caddies said so:
my private impression is that the young ruffians
searched the pockets on their own——”</p>

<p>“Why on earth should they do that?” asked
Reeves.</p>

<p>“Well, you know what caddies are—it’s a
demoralizing profession. Not that I believe much in
boys going to school myself, but it does keep them
out of mischief. Those two boys, I think, went
through the pockets on their own.”</p>

<p>“They left four bob there,” suggested Gordon.</p>

<p>“Yes, boys are frightened of stealing money;
they connect it with going to prison. But they don’t
mind stealing other things; I think they could tell
you why the pouch was empty, and why there was
only one cigarette left in the case—they were too
clever to clear both completely. After all, you
know, it isn’t very long since people gave up
‘wrecking’ in Cornwall. I remember a very interesting
conversation I had with a man down there in
the <i>Lugger</i> Inn at Fowey——”</p>

<p>“You were going to tell us something about a
clue,” said Gordon gently.</p>

<p>“Ah yes: one of them came up to me afterwards—it
was the one they call Ginger. I wonder why
are boys with red hair called Ginger? Ginger is
of a greenish-yellow tinge, if you come to think of
it. Where was I? Yes, he came up to me with
a photograph, and told me that it had fallen out
of one of the pockets as they carried the body.
That is almost impossible, you know, for a man
always carries photographs in his breast pocket,
and a thing can’t fall out of a man’s breast pocket
unless you turn him upside down and shake him.
Ginger was obviously scared at the thought that he
might be concealing a clue—he referred to it as a
‘clue’ himself—and did not care to give it to the
police; so he handed it over to me.”</p>

<p>“And you?”</p>

<p>“I have it here in my pocket—the breast pocket,
observe. To tell the truth, I am a little
absent-minded, and it was only during the inquest that
I remembered the photograph; it seemed to me too
late then to mention anything about it in public.”</p>

<p>“Carmichael,” said Gordon very seriously, “if
you don’t produce that photograph it will, I gather,
be necessary to turn you upside down and shake
you.”</p>

<p>“Of course, of course.” Carmichael fumbled in
his pocket, and from a voluminous pocket-book
produced with great deliberation the object of their
impatience. It represented the head and shoulders
of a young woman: the features were refined, and
might in real life have been beautiful. The camera
cannot lie, but the camera of the local “artist”
generally finds it difficult to tell nothing but the truth:
and this was the work of a Mr. Campbell, whose
studio was no further off than Binver. Meanwhile
the photograph was not in its first youth; and the
style of coiffure represented suggested (with what
could be seen of the dress) a period dating some ten
years back. It was not signed or initialled
anywhere.</p>

<p>“Well,” said Reeves, when the trove had been
handed round, “that doesn’t prove that we’re much
further on. But it looks as if we had come across
a phase of Brotherhood’s life that wasn’t alluded
to at the inquest.”</p>

<p>Gordon shuddered. “Just think if one went off
the hooks suddenly, and people came round and
tried to dig up one’s past from the old photographs
and keepsakes one had hidden away in drawers!
One should destroy everything—certainly one should
destroy everything.”</p>

<p>But Reeves was no sentimentalist; he was a
sleuth-hound with nose down on the trail. “Let’s
see,” he reflected, “I can’t remember at the moment
what the present Binver photographer is called.”</p>

<p>“You will find it,” suggested Carmichael, “on
that group over your head.” Reeves had it down
in a minute.</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s right: Campbell,” he said. “Now,
if one of us goes off in Binver and says he’s found
this photograph, and would Mr. Campbell be kind
enough to let us know the address it was originally
sent to, so that we can restore it, that ought to do
the trick. Photographers are full of professional
etiquette, but I don’t see that we could go wrong
here.”</p>

<p>“I don’t mind going,” said Marryatt; “as a matter
of fact, I’ve got to ride in to see a man on
business.”</p>

<p>“Heaven defend me,” said Reeves, “from having
business with anybody at Binver!”</p>

<p>“You will, though, with this man, some day.”</p>

<p>“Why, who is it?”</p>

<p>“The undertaker,” said Marryatt.</p>

<p>“Undertakers,” said Carmichael, “have been very
much maligned in literature. They are always
represented as either cynical or morbid in the exercise
of their profession. As a matter of fact, I am
told that no class of men is more considerate or more
tactful.”</p>

<p>“I’ll be back in three-quarters of an hour,” said
Marryatt, buttoning the photograph away.
“Carmichael, I hope you won’t produce any more clues
while I’m away.”</p>

<p>When Marryatt had gone, and Carmichael had
sauntered off to the billiard-room, Reeves sat on
there fidgeting and discussing the possible
significance of the latest find.</p>

<p>“It’s odd,” he said, “how one can live for years
in the artificial life of a club like this and not know
one’s neighbours in the least. We’re a world to
ourselves, and an outside face like that conveys
nothing to us; probably the name won’t either.
What beats me at present about the photograph is
this—how long ago would you say that photograph
was taken?”</p>

<p>“I’m not an authority on ladies’ fashions, I’m
afraid, but surely it’s pre-war.”</p>

<p>“Exactly. Now, Brotherhood only came here
just at the end of the war, at least, he only joined
the Club then; I asked the Secretary about it.
And ‘Davenant’ joined even later, only a year or
two ago. When a man takes a house here, one
assumes that he’s only come here for the golf. But
it looks as if Brotherhood, or else his phantom self,
Davenant, knew the Binver world already—at least
well enough to possess photographs of its belles.”</p>

<p>“Not necessarily,” Gordon pointed out. “She
may have had no later portrait to give him than
that one, even if she gave it him only a year or two
ago.”</p>

<p>“That’s true. And yet women generally keep
their portraits pretty well up-to-date. Here’s
another point—from the caddie’s account, it seems
that this portrait must have been loose in the
pocket; but he can’t always have carried it like
that. . . . Good Lord, what a fool I am! What size was
the empty frame in Davenant’s cottage?”</p>

<p>“Oh, just that size. It’s a common size, of course,
but I suppose most likely it was that portrait which
‘Davenant’ caught up in a hurry before he left his
house; and crammed it into his pocket anyhow.
Assuming, of course, that Carmichael’s right.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that makes the thing as clear as daylight,
so far. I hope Marryatt makes good time. Look
how slow we’ve been on the murderer’s tracks;
we’ve given him two full days already.”</p>

<p>“By the way,” said Gordon, “I’ve just
remembered—Thursday’s early closing day at Binver.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch09">

<h2>Chapter IX. <br/> The Animated Picture</h2>

<p>“Well,” said Reeves impatiently, as
Marryatt came, rather late, into the
dining-room, “did you find out?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I went round to Campbell’s——”</p>

<p>“But it’s early closing day.”</p>

<p>“Yes, only . . . only Campbell was open, for
some reason. He made no difficulty about identifying
the portrait or about giving me the address.
When he told me the name and address I
remembered quite a lot about her.”</p>

<p>“Who is she, then?”</p>

<p>“Her name is Miss Rendall-Smith. Her father,
old Canon Rendall-Smith, was Rector of Binver for
a long time, a learned old man, I believe, but rather
a bore. He died some years before the war—I
should think it would be about 1910, and left her
very badly off; she left the neighbourhood
then—that was just before I came. Some time during
the early part of the war she came back, apparently
in much better circumstances, for she took that
old brick house with the white window-frames that
stands next the Church and looks as if it was the
Rectory but isn’t. She lives there still; she did
a good deal of public work during the war,
subscriptions and things, but I never actually came
across her. She’s a fine-looking woman still,
Campbell told me—by the way, there was no reticence
about Campbell. He showed me a more recent
portrait of her which he was very proud of, and
told me he thought it was a pity a lady like that
didn’t marry. Altogether, we seem to have struck
a public character, and a very good woman, by all
that’s said of her.”</p>

<p>“H’m,” said Reeves, “and Brotherhood kept a
portrait of her—or rather, Brotherhood in his
capacity as Davenant kept a portrait of her, and took
it away with him when he meant to leave these parts
for a bit. It seems to me she ought to be able to
tell us something about him.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord!” said Marryatt, “you aren’t going
to introduce yourself to <em>her</em> as the <i>Daily Mail</i>
reporter? Hang it all, it’s one thing to take in Mrs.
Bramston——”</p>

<p>“And another thing to take in Miss Rendall-Smith,
because she’s a lady? I’m afraid that seems to me
mere sentimentalism.”</p>

<p>“What I meant was, if you present yourself to
Miss Rendall-Smith as a reporter, she’ll turn you
out of the house.”</p>

<p>“Ye-es. There’s something in that. But then,
I wouldn’t say I’d come from the <i>Daily Mail</i>; I’d
say I’d come from the <i>County Herald</i>, and that I
was commissioned to do a write-up of Brotherhood
as a prominent local personage.”</p>

<p>“But how,” objected Carmichael, “would you
explain the fact that you were coming to her?
Remember, it isn’t certain that she knew Brotherhood
at all, that is, in his own person. You see it was
not to Brotherhood but to Davenant that she gave
the photograph. And natural enough—if I had been
in that position, I would sooner have gone courting
as Davenant than as Brotherhood.”</p>

<p>“I could simply pretend I was coming to her as
to one of the oldest residents.”</p>

<p>“Tactful Openings, Number One,” suggested
Gordon, crumbling his bread. “No, Reeves, it won’t
do. I’d like to see you dressed up as a reporter
again, because I think there’s something very
fetching about it. But I don’t believe that even in that
disguise you will win the heart of a mature female.
You’ll have to think out some other dodge.”</p>

<p>“I suppose you’d like me to burgle her house
while she’s out,” said Reeves, with unnecessary
irritation.</p>

<p>“But you don’t want to see her house,” objected
the literal-minded Gordon, “you want to see her.”</p>

<p>“Very well, then,” said Reeves, “I shall go and
tell her the truth. At least, I shall tell her that
we’re investigating Brotherhood’s murder, and that
this portrait of her was found on the body. I shall
urge her to tell me if she knows of any enemies
that Brotherhood had, any secrets which might
throw light upon his end.”</p>

<p>“That’s far the best principle,” agreed Gordon.
“Always tell the truth, and people will never
believe you.”</p>

<p>“Why shouldn’t she believe me?”</p>

<p>“No reason in the world; only as a matter of
fact she won’t. It’s rather a satire on humanity,
but I’ve always found that the safest way to conceal
a fact is to state it quite baldly. Then people
always think you’re pulling their legs, or being
sarcastic, and the secret is preserved.”</p>

<p>“You’re a sceptical old Sadducee. I don’t believe
a woman like this would have such a low view of
humanity.”</p>

<p>“Like what?”</p>

<p>“Like the portrait.”</p>

<p>“Are you falling in love with her already?
Marryatt, it seems to me, between funerals and
marriages, you’re going to be a busy man.”</p>

<p>“Don’t be a fool,” said Reeves. “I don’t know
anything about women, except that some of them
are so ugly I recognize them when I meet them in
the street. This clearly isn’t one of them. But
I have trained myself to judge faces a bit, and
this looks to me like the face of a woman who’s
straight herself and expects others to be straight
with her.”</p>

<p>“Let’s have another look,” urged Gordon.
Marryatt produced the photograph, and it was
passed round once more. “I dare say you’re right,”
admitted Gordon. “The curious thing to me is that
a good-looking woman like that who’s not actually
a beauty—not classic features, I mean—should look
so deadly serious when she’s having her photograph
taken. I should have thought even Mr. Campbell
would have had the sense to make a little
photographer’s joke; or at least tell her to moisten her
lips.”</p>

<p>“You’re right,” said Carmichael. “The look is
a very serious one; but I believe a portrait is all
the better for that—as a portrait, I mean. Have
you ever thought what an advantage the historians
of the future will have over us? Think how late
portraiture itself comes into history; I think I’m
right in saying that a thumb-nail sketch of Edward
II in the margin of an old chronicle is the earliest
portrait preserved to us in English history. And
when portrait-painting did come in, how soon the
art was corrupted! You can see that Holbein was
telling the truth; but by the time you get to
Vandyck it’s all court flattery. Whereas the historians
of the future will be able to see what we really were
like.”</p>

<p>“It looks to me,” said Reeves, “a sad face—the
face of a woman who’s had a good deal of trouble.
I feel somehow that the serious pose of the mouth
was natural to her.”</p>

<p>“I don’t think that’s the ordinary impression you’d
get from her face,” put in Marryatt.</p>

<p>“How on earth do you know?” asked Reeves,
staring.</p>

<p>“Well, you see, Campbell showed me this later
photograph of her, and it wasn’t at all like that.”</p>

<p>“Well,” suggested Gordon, “it’s not much good
discussing the portrait if Reeves is going to see
the lovely original to-morrow. I want to know
what’s wrong with a game of bridge?”</p>

<p>“Good idea,” said Marryatt, “it’ll take our minds
off the murder. You know, I think you fellows are
getting rather fanciful about the whole thing.”</p>

<p>“All right,” said Reeves, “my room, though, not
downstairs. What’s the good of having one’s own
fireplace if one can’t light a fire in October?”</p>

<p>Reeves’ room deserves, perhaps, a fuller
description than it has hitherto been given. It had been
the best bedroom of the old Dower-house, and for
some reason had been spared when several smaller
rooms had been divided up, at the time of the club’s
installation. It was, consequently, a quite unspoiled
piece of early Tudor architecture; there were
latticed windows with deep recesses; dark, irregular
beams supported the white-plastered ceiling; the
walls were oak-panelled; the fireplace open and of
genuine old brick. When the fire, reluctant after
long desuetude, had been induced to crackle, and
threw flickering reflections where the shade of the
electric light gave subdued half tones, there was an
air of comfort which seemed to dispel all thought of
detective problems, of murderers stalking the world
unpunished, of the open grave that waited in Paston
Oatvile churchyard.</p>

<p>Gordon put down the photograph on a jutting
cornice that went round the panelling. “There,
Reeves,” he said, “you shall sit opposite the lady,
and derive inspiration from her. I cannot ask you
to hope that she will smile upon your efforts, but
it ought to be an encouragement.”</p>

<p>They were soon immersed in that reverential
silence and concentration which the game fosters:
and if Miss Rendall-Smith’s portrait did not receive
much of their attention, it is probable that the lady
herself, had she been present, would have been
treated with little more ceremony. Reeves,
however, was bad at taking his mind off a subject, and
when, as dummy, he was given a short interval of
unrepose, his eyes strayed to the photograph anew.
Was this the face, perhaps, that had lured
Brotherhood to his strange doom? Was she even an
accomplice, burdened now with the participation of
a guilty secret? Or was she the sufferer by the
crime; and did she wait vainly for news of
Davenant, little knowing that it was Davenant who lay
waiting for burial at Paston Whitchurch? Poor
woman, it seemed likely in any case that she
would have much to bear—was it decent to inflict
on her a detective interview and a series of
importunate questions? He crushed down the insurgent
weakness: there was no other way for it, she must
be confronted with the facts. The face looked even
more beautiful as you saw it in the firelight, shaded
from the glare of the lamp. He strolled over to
look at it again just as the last trump was led.</p>

<p>“Good God!”</p>

<p>The others turned, in all the irritation of an
interrupted train of thought, to find him staring
at the photograph as if in horror. Then he stepped
quickly across to the lamp, and turned it sideways
so as to throw the light full on the wall. And
then they too turned a little pale. The photograph
had smiled.</p>

<p>There was, to be sure, only the faintest flicker of
a smile on the lips; you could not give any formula
of it or trace the lines of it. And yet it was the
simultaneous impression of these four men that the
whole character, the whole impression of the face
before them had changed while they had played
three hands of bridge. The whole face was
indefinably more human and more beautiful; but you could
not say why.</p>

<p>“Oh, for God’s sake let’s give the beastly thing
up!” cried Marryatt. “It doesn’t do to meddle
with these things; one doesn’t know what one’s
up against. Reeves, I know it hurts your vanity
to leave an inquiry half-finished, but I’m sure it’s
a mistake to go on. Brotherhood, you know—he
wasn’t quite canny; I always thought there was
something uncanny about him. Do let’s give it up.”</p>

<p>“The thing isn’t possible,” said Reeves slowly.
“It’s the difference of the light, I think; the light
wasn’t so strong downstairs. It’s funny how one
can imagine these things.”</p>

<p>“I was never in a haunted house myself,” said
Carmichael, “but I remember very well the College
used to own land at Luttercombe, where the De
Mumfords lived, don’t you know, and our old Bursar
always insisted that he heard screams in the night
when he slept there. I don’t believe in these things
myself, though; fancy can play such extraordinary
tricks.”</p>

<p>“But look here, we all noticed the difference,”
objected Marryatt.</p>

<p>“Well, there is such a thing as collective
hallucination. Somebody tells us the face looks grave, and
our imagination reads gravity into it; and then
somebody says it’s changed, and we can’t see the gravity
there any longer.”</p>

<p>“That’s it,” said Reeves, who was pouring
himself out a stiff whisky-and-soda. “It’s collective
hallucination. Must be.”</p>

<p>It was characteristic of Gordon that, without
expressing any opinion, he had been the only one of
the four who quite liked to go up and touch the
photograph. He held it now close under the light,
and looked at it from different angles.</p>

<p>“I’m hanged if it doesn’t look different,” he said
at last. “Sympathetic ink? No, that’s nonsense.
But it’s a dashed rum thing, photography: I wonder
if the heat of the room can have brought out some
bit of shadow on the face that wasn’t visible before?”</p>

<p>“A damp spot possibly,” said Reeves, “which has
faded out. It was rather close to the fire. Oh,
what’s the good of worrying? Let’s all go to bed.
I’m going to lock the thing up in the drawer here;
and we can have another look at it in the morning.
We’re all over-excited.”</p>

<p>“That’s it,” said Carmichael, opening the door,
“I remember once in Eastern Roumelia——” but,
as he managed to fall down the step into the passage,
the reminiscence was fortunately lost.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch10">

<h2>Chapter X. <br/> In which a Book is more communicative than a Lady</h2>

<p>Morning, as might have been expected,
brought division of counsel. Mordaunt
Reeves could now find no difference
between the photograph as he saw it at the moment
and the photograph as he had seen it at dinner the
previous night. Carmichael agreed with him,
though he still talked a good deal about collective
hallucinations. Gordon could not make up his mind
one way or the other; only Marryatt was certain
that there had been a change. Anyhow, change or
no change, Reeves put the once dreaded object in
his pocket, and set out after breakfast in Gordon’s
side-car. Gordon volunteered to drive him over,
though firmly announcing that he would not go
inside Miss Rendall-Smith’s house; Carmichael sought
to deter them by wise saws and modern instances,
and they left him <i lang="la">multa volentem dicere</i> at the
clubhouse door.</p>

<p>It must be confessed that Reeves felt a certain
misgiving as he waited in Miss Rendall-Smith’s
drawing-room. Rooms do echo personalities, and
this drawing-room spoke of a forceful one; the
furnishing was strategically perfect, the flowers were
arranged purposefully, the books were books that
had been collected, not simply amassed. The room
smelt, Reeves said afterwards, of not having been
smoked in. Nor did the lady of the house belie
this first impression. Her beauty was still
undeniable, but it was something more than beauty which
disarmed you. You felt at once that she was kind
and that she was competent, but you felt that if
a choice had to be made she would be competent
rather than kind. She might have been the matron
of a big hospital, instead of an unoccupied
householder in a small country town.</p>

<p>“Good-morning, Mr. Reeves,” she said, “it’s very
kind of you to come and see me. I don’t think we
ever met, did we? I know the Secretary, of course,
and several of the club members, but we’re rather
out of the golfing world down here. But my maid
says you want to see me on urgent
business—please tell me if I can be of any use.”</p>

<p>Mordaunt Reeves, with an unaccountable feeling
of being the detected rather than the detective,
produced the photograph from his pocket, and asked
melodramatically, “Excuse me, Miss Rendall-Smith,
but do you recognize this photograph?”</p>

<p>There was just the fraction of a pause, just the
suspicion of a gasp. Then she said, “Of course I
do! I don’t know whether my looking-glass would,
of course . . . but a thing like this can’t be done
behind one’s back, can it? I think it was taken
when I was here before, while my father was still
alive. What did you want to know about it?”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid it must seem very impertinent of
me to be asking questions about it, but the thing
is of importance. I think I’d better tell you the
whole situation. You’ll have heard, of course, this
sad news about poor old Brotherhood, at Paston
Whitchurch?”</p>

<p>“I read about it, of course, in the paper.”</p>

<p>“Well, one or two of his friends, that is, of
people who knew him down at the club, aren’t quite
satisfied with the line the police have taken about
it. They think—we think they swallowed the idea
of suicide too easily, without examining all the facts;
and—well, the thing we can’t feel certain of is that
there hasn’t been foul play.”</p>

<p>“Foul play? But why should anybody . . .”</p>

<p>“Oh, we’ve no suspicion of any motive. We
thought, perhaps, that was where you might help
us. It was I and some friends of mine who actually
found the body, you know, and there were certain
indications which suggested to us that Brotherhood
had . . . had been murdered. There was the position
of his hat, for example—still, we needn’t go
into all that. We did entertain the suspicion very
strongly, only the clues we had at our disposal
weren’t sufficient to let us follow up our suspicions,
if you see what I mean. The only one which we
felt might help us to get any further was this
photograph. By a mere accident, for which I’m not
responsible, it didn’t get into the hands of the police.”</p>

<p>“The police know nothing about it?”</p>

<p>“We have no reason to think they do. But it
was found in Brotherhood’s pocket—at least, it was
found in circumstances which made it quite clear
that it had fallen out of his pocket, when the . . .
when his body was being moved.”</p>

<p>Miss Rendall-Smith took another look at the
portrait, which still lay in her hands. “Then,” she
said, “what exactly do you want me to do about
it?”</p>

<p>“Well, you must understand, of course, that we
are very reluctant to open up any subject which
may be painful to you. But at the same time, since
it seemed likely that you had some knowledge of
Brotherhood’s history and circumstances which the
world at large doesn’t share, we thought perhaps you
would tell us whether you can form any guess
yourself as to the circumstances of his death. To put
it in the concrete, do you know of any one who
would have a motive for wishing ill to Brotherhood,
or who might be likely to take his life?”</p>

<p>“I see. You want me to help justice. But you
want me to help you, not the police.”</p>

<p>“We are helping the police ourselves. Only the
police are not always very—what shall I say?—the
police don’t always encourage help from
outside; there is a good deal of red tape about their
methods. I was in the Military Intelligence myself
during the war, and had some opportunity of
seeing the unfortunate effects of rivalry and jealousy
between the various departments. We have not
approached the police; we thought it best to work on
our own until we could present them with a <i lang="fr">fait
accompli</i>. That is why we have not even mentioned
to the police the existence of this photograph which
we found on the body.”</p>

<p>“Mr. Reeves——”</p>

<p>A woman can use a surname as a bludgeon. That
title of respect, “Mr. So-and-So,” which expresses
our relations to the outside world, has often, indeed,
had an ominous ring for us. Deans used it when
they were protesting at our neglect of chapels;
proctors, when they urged the immodesty of going out
to dinner without a cap and gown. But nobody can
use it with the same annihilating effect as a woman
scorned. “Mister”—you are a man, I a defenceless
woman. “Mister”—you have the title of a gentleman,
although you are behaving like a cad. “Mister”—you
see, I treat you with all possible politeness,
although you have not deserved any such
respect from me. There is irony in the word
“Mister”; it makes one long for a title.</p>

<p>“Mr. Reeves, I am sorry to say that you are not
telling me the truth.”</p>

<p>Reeves sat stunned. It was too bad, that he
should have thrown away disguises only to be called
a liar. It was too bad that Gordon should have
been right when he said “Nothing deceives like
the truth.” He sat there humbled, waiting for
more.</p>

<p>“Of course, I don’t see at all why you and your
friends see fit to treat me in this way. The only
thing that seems quite clear to me is that it is
unfair to expect me to be frank with you when you
are not being frank with me. I am sorry to say
that I cannot help you.”</p>

<p>“May I say something? I am afraid you feel
that you are being left in the dark because I am
not telling you everything, all the suspicions we
have formed as well as the facts which have come
to our notice. I can quite understand that, if that
is what you mean, but——”</p>

<p>“I mean nothing of the kind. I mean that the
statements which you have made to me are, to my
certain knowledge, untrue.”</p>

<p>Reeves gave a rather ghastly smile. “Would
you mind telling me exactly which statement of
mine it is that you call in question?”</p>

<p>“Really, Mr. Reeves, you seem to expect a great
deal of me. You come to me, a complete stranger,
asking for private information. You ask for it on
the ground that you are conducting a private
investigation, and you tell me your story. I do not
know whether there is a word of truth in your story.
I only know that one detail in it is demonstrably
false. You now expect me to tell you which that
detail is, so that you can correct the only part of
your story which I know to be false; is that
reasonable? Come now, Mr. Reeves, tell me the whole
story again, exactly as it happened, and I will see
if I can help you.”</p>

<p>“I’m really very sorry, but I have already told
you the truth to the best of my ability. I am afraid
I could not alter my ‘story,’ as you call it, without
falsification.”</p>

<p>“Well, I am afraid we seem to be at cross
purposes. Perhaps it would be best if you conducted
your researches independently, since we cannot
agree?”</p>

<p>There was no mistaking the hint of the front door
about this last suggestion. Reeves rose with what
dignity he could muster, and took his leave. It
must be regretfully admitted that Gordon received
the account he gave of his experiences with
tempestuous laughter; and Reeves was glad of that
mantle of inaudibility which cuts off the motor-cyclist
from his side-car when it is in motion.</p>

<p>Carmichael, who met them at the door of the
club, was more sympathetic. In his view, Miss
Rendall-Smith had given the photograph to
Davenant, not realizing his identity with Brotherhood,
and had thought it impossible that Davenant should
have allowed so precious a document to pass out
of his possession. But he was in high spirits,
having made, he said, a little discovery of his own.</p>

<p>“You know you told me about your efforts to
identify the book from which the cipher was
taken—the cipher on the postcard? Well, you went the
right way to work, but not, if you will excuse my
saying so, taking all the possibilities into account.
Supposing that Brotherhood had the actual book
with him in the carriage when he left London, you
have to remember that he changed at Paston
Oatvile. Now, I asked myself, what if, from some
carelessness or want of interest, he should have left
the book in that first-class railway carriage? That
train, you see, stops for good at Paston Oatvile,
and is cleaned out there the same night.”</p>

<p>“Of course. I was a fool not to think of that.”</p>

<p>“Well, I went off to the station while you were
away, and repeated your own trick.”</p>

<p>“Selecting an imaginary book of your own, I
suppose?”</p>

<p>“No; it is always better to put one story about
the country-side rather than two. I said that a
friend of mine had lost a copy of <i>The Sorrows of
Satan</i>, and was anxious to recover it. The porter
referred me to another porter, <b>the</b> other porter,
to be accurate, and he informed me that he had
found, in that train, a copy of a book called
Immorality.”</p>

<p>“But there isn’t a book called that.”</p>

<p>“I know. Many might be, but none are.
However, I saw what was up. The porter, by a train
of thought which I find myself unable to follow,
had taken the book home to his wife: and it was
no surprise to me when she produced a copy of
Momerie’s <i>Immortality</i>. It had been a disappointment
to her, it seemed, and she made no difficulty
about parting with it.”</p>

<p>“But have you any reason for thinking it’s the
book we’re looking for?”</p>

<p>“Yes. There are a lot of lines down the side,
queries and shriek-marks occasionally, which
convince me that the thing was in Brotherhood’s hands.
Only, of course, we want your copy of the cipher to
read it from.”</p>

<p>“Excellent man. Let’s come up at once. I
ought to be able to lay my hands on it, though I
can never be certain. I play a perpetual game with
the maid who does my rooms; she always seems to
think that documents are more easy to deal with
if they’re piled up in a great heap, instead of lying
scattered about. Every morning I disarrange them,
and the next morning, as sure as fate, they are piled
up again.” They had reached Reeves’ room by
now. “Let’s see; that’s the Income Tax, and that’s
my aunt, and that’s that man . . . Ha! what’s this?
No . . . No . . . this can’t be it . . . well, I’m
dashed! The thing seems to have gone.”</p>

<p>“You’re sure you didn’t keep it in your pocket?”</p>

<p>“I don’t think so . . . No, it’s not there. Look
here, I’ll go through them again . . . You know,
it’s a very rum thing, because I took another look
at that cipher only last night.”</p>

<p>“And now it’s gone. Anything else missing?”</p>

<p>“Not that I can see. Oh, I say, this is the limit!
First of all I got the cipher without the key, and
then I get the key without the cipher.”</p>

<p>“How like life,” suggested Gordon.</p>

<p>“What’s this? ‘Hold it and thoughts with the . . .’
oh, splendid! Look here, I worked the cipher
out all wrong in this beastly <i>Formation of Character</i>
book. But when I did that, I turned down all the
pages I wanted, and underlined the significant words.
So old Watson will come in useful after all. Hang
on one moment—yes, here it is. Now, ready? The
word ‘hold’ is the fifth word on the seventh line of
page 8. What’s that in Momerie?”</p>

<p>“That’s ‘you.’ It sounds all right for the
beginning of a message.”</p>

<p>And so they worked it out, this time more
fruitfully. When the process was complete, Carmichael
had a half-sheet in front of him on which the words
appeared, “You will perish if you go back upon
your faith.”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Gordon meditatively. “That’s too
good to be mere coincidence. That was the
message—was it a threat or a warning?—which was
sent to Brotherhood, and old Brotherhood worked
it out, presumably, in his Momerie, but wasn’t in
time to profit by it. The only thing is, now we’ve
got it, it doesn’t seem to get us much further.”</p>

<p>“It means, I suppose,” said Carmichael, “that
Brotherhood had promised to do something, and was
trying to back out of it.”</p>

<p>“Possibly that,” said Reeves.</p>

<p>“Why possibly? What else could it mean?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I don’t know . . . No, of course; that’s it.
But, as Gordon says, it doesn’t seem to get us much
further.”</p>

<p>“Not in itself,” agreed Carmichael. “But
meanwhile it has incidentally provided us with an extra
clue.”</p>

<p>“What’s that?” asked Gordon.</p>

<p>“I’ll tell you some other time. I say, it’s time for
luncheon. Let’s go down.”</p>

<p>And it was not till they were downstairs that
he explained his meaning. “The other clue is the
disappearance of the cipher. There’s more in that
than meets the eye, unless I’m mistaken.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch11">

<h2>Chapter XI. <br/> A Funeral and a Vigil</h2>

<p>“I don’t quite see what you mean,” said Reeves
as they sat down to luncheon.</p>

<p>“Never mind,” said Carmichael, “we shall
see if I’m right or not. Meanwhile, there’s the
funeral this afternoon, and it would hardly be
decent to take any action till after that, would it?
Hullo, Marryatt, what time does the thing start?”</p>

<p>“Half-past two. A good many of the members
mean to turn out, and one wanted them to get away
in time for an afternoon round. I must say, I
think the club’s done handsomely by poor
Brotherhood, considering how few of us really knew him.
The Committee has sent a very fine wreath.”</p>

<p>“And that’s the only one, I should think,” said
Gordon.</p>

<p>“Oddly enough, it isn’t. There’s one other, a
peculiarly expensive-looking thing, which came down
from London. There’s no name on it, no
inscription of any kind, in fact.”</p>

<p>“H’m!” said Reeves; “that’s curious.”</p>

<p>“My dear Reeves,” expostulated Gordon, “I’m
not going to have you examining the wreaths on
the coffin with your lens and forceps. There are
limits of decency.”</p>

<p>“Well, I won’t worry about it anyhow till
Carmichael has—Hullo! hit him on the back, Gordon.”
For Carmichael had been overtaken by one of those
choking fits which the best-behaved of us are
liable to.</p>

<p>“It’s a curious thing,” he gasped on recovering,
“that one always used to say, when one was small,
that one’s drink had ‘gone the wrong way.’
Nothing at all to do with the wind-pipe, I believe.”</p>

<p>The funeral was, it must be confessed, a riot of
irony. The members who attended had decided that
it would look bad to take their clubs with them
to the churchyard, but their costumes were plainly
a compromise between respect for the dead and a
determination to get on with business as soon as
it was over. None of them had any tears to shed.
The village of Paston Oatvile turned out to a child
in sheer morbidity, to see “ ’im as fell down off of
the railway put away.” The sonorous assurances
of the burial service had to be read out in full
earshot of the village green on which, little more than
a week ago, Brotherhood had laboriously disproved
the doctrine of personal immortality. To these
same solemn cadences the great lords of Oatvile, ever
since they abandoned the Old Faith under William
III, had been laid to rest within these same walls—</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">Some with lives that came to nothing, some with deeds
as well undone</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p class="noindent">—and yet there had been a sort of feudal dignity
about their manner of departing. But this unknown
sojourner of a day, who had known hardly a soul
in the parish, who had loved nothing of all that
country-side except eighteen little holes in the
ground, what mourning could there be for him—the
body so mangled, the soul whose existence he
had denied?</p>

<p>One understood why people wanted to be
cremated. While we keep all our seriousness for our
frivolities, what wonder that men feel a sense of
disproportion about the traditional solemnities of
interment? With the villagers, indeed, it was
different—you might almost say that the hour of their
funerals was the hour they lived for. It made them
one with the earth they had tilled and furrowed;
it gave them, at last, a permanent tenure among their
own immemorial fields. “Man that is born of
woman is full of sorrow and hath but a short
time”—they had learned, unconsciously, to measure their
lives by the secular oaks in the great park, by the
weather-beaten antiquity of the village church
itself. But this strange race of light-hearted invaders,
to whom each spot of ground was no more than a
good lie or a bad one, what part had they in the
communal life of these retired valleys? It meant
nothing to them.</p>

<p>We have been following the service with
Gordon’s eyes; Reeves, it is probable, was lost in
speculation as to the donor of the mysterious wreath,
and Carmichael was doubtless reminded of a
thousand things. But it was over at last, and Reeves,
eager to get back to business, implored Carmichael
to explain his hints about the disappearance of the
cipher. “Wait till we get back to your room,” was
the only answer. And, when the desired haven was
reached, “Have another look among those papers,
and make certain you didn’t pass it over by
mistake.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord,” said Reeves suddenly, “here it is!
But I swear it wasn’t when I looked before. I
say, Carmichael, have you been playing the funny
ass with the thing?”</p>

<p>“No,” said Carmichael, “I haven’t.”</p>

<p>“Who has, then?”</p>

<p>“That’s the point. I should be glad if I were in
a position to enlighten you. You see, I know the
maid was blameless as regards that piece of paper.
She only does the rooms early in the morning; now,
I came in after breakfast, when you’d gone off to
Binver, to have another look at the cipher and see
if I could make anything of it by inspection. And
it was still there.”</p>

<p>“And you’re sure you didn’t take it away with
you?”</p>

<p>“Positive. Now, observe this: that document
must have been taken away while you and Gordon
were both at Binver, while I was over at the station.”</p>

<p>“But how did it get back there?”</p>

<p>“It was put back there. And it was put back
there, not during luncheon, for I had another look
afterwards, but while we were down at the funeral.
It follows that none of our party this afternoon has
been meddling with your papers—I’m glad to think,
for example, that the Secretary escapes suspicion.”</p>

<p>“But do you seriously mean to say there’s
somebody in this house who comes into my room and
disturbs my papers for his own ends?”</p>

<p>“Don’t be so shocked about it. You’ve been
spending the last three days spying on other
people; is it impossible that other people should spy
on you? Look here, that paper is in your room
at half-past ten; it is no longer there at half-past
twelve; it is back again at four o’clock. Do you
mean to tell me that somebody acquainted with your
habits hasn’t been meddling with your papers?”</p>

<p>“What made you suspect it?”</p>

<p>“That’s the odd thing. Did you ever notice how
often a false calculation puts you on the track of
a true one? Puzzling over that odd experience we
had last night about the photograph, I found myself
wondering whether conceivably some one could have
come in and altered it while you were out. Well,
upon reflection, that was impossible, because we were
in the room the whole time, all four of us. But
meanwhile, it did occur to me that perhaps our
proceedings were being rather too public. Look
how full of comparative strangers this dormy-house
is; any one of those may be Brotherhood’s murderer,
for all we know, or at least an accomplice. And
then, when you found the cipher gone, it occurred
to me at once, ‘I was right; there is somebody on
the spot who is following our movements!’ That
was why I had that choking-fit at luncheon—you
were just going to talk about the disappearance of
the cipher in a crowded dining-room; and it seemed
to me imprudent.”</p>

<p>“But, look here, what’s the man’s game? Why
take the thing away and then put it back again?”</p>

<p>“My dear Reeves, you shouldn’t go to funerals,
it has a depressing effect on your intelligence. The
cipher was taken away this morning, when it might
have been of some use to you, I suspect, by
somebody who had seen me looking at it and so
realized that it was important. Then, by a mere
accident, it proved that you did not need the paper
after all, and had read the message without it.
I saw what would happen—if we left your room
empty, the cipher, now useless, would be put back.
And that is exactly what happened. The hypothesis
has become a certainty.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord,” said Reeves, walking up and down
the room. “What on earth are we to do about it?”</p>

<p>“Keep quiet about our movements for one thing.
I shouldn’t even discuss them with Marryatt more
than you can help: he’s a little slow-witted, you
see, and a little fond of talking, so anything you
say to him may get round. Gordon is different—he’s
all right. The next point is clear. We must
set a trap of some kind, and catch our man
red-handed.”</p>

<p>“You mean the murderer?”</p>

<p>“Not necessarily the murderer. The man who is
watching us; it may not be the murderer at all.”</p>

<p>“But how do you propose to catch him?”</p>

<p>“I propose that two of us—preferably you and
Gordon, because I am fond of my sleep—should sit
up to-night and watch outside the door.
Meantime, we have to excite the curiosity of your visitor
so powerfully that he will want to come out and
investigate your room. I propose that we should
put up a notice (with the Secretary’s leave, of
course) saying that you have one or two of
Brotherhood’s books and things which you are prepared
to give away as souvenirs to anybody who cared
for him; please apply to your rooms to-morrow.
And now let’s go down and have some tea.”</p>

<p>“But I haven’t got any of Brotherhood’s things,”
objected Reeves as they went downstairs.</p>

<p>“Exactly. And nobody cared a brass farthing
for Brotherhood. But meanwhile, there is every
chance that this anonymous gentleman will be
interested to see what you have got, and will pay a
nocturnal visit to your room. If you see anybody
pass, you can fall on him and throttle him. If
nobody passes, at about one o’clock I should go to
bed if I were you. It’s a pity to forgo one’s sleep.”</p>

<p>“Well, we’d better do the thing thoroughly. I’ll
go out this evening and come in with a bag, so as
to look as if I’d been over and got some things from
Brotherhood’s house.”</p>

<p>“That’s a good idea. One moment, I must go
over to young van Beuren and get some
chewing-gum.”</p>

<p>“Carmichael,” said Reeves when he got back,
“you’ve been surprising us a good deal lately, but
one thing I should never have guessed about you—I
should never have imagined that you chewed.”</p>

<p>“I don’t,” said Carmichael, and would answer
no more questions on the subject. Nor had Reeves
any opportunity to press the point, for Marryatt
came in soon afterwards, and sat down at their
table. “Is it true?” asked Carmichael, “that
Brotherhood is the first member of the club to be
buried here?”</p>

<p>“He is. There was Parry, of course, who died
here, but he was buried in London. It must be
strange for these Oatviles, who have had all the
expensive funerals to themselves for the last two
hundred years, to make room for an old fellow like
that.”</p>

<p>“Two hundred? Why not three hundred?” asked
Reeves.</p>

<p>“Well, the Oatviles were Catholics, you know,
up to James II’s time. People say that the room
we use as the billiard-room now used to be the
chapel at one time. And the Oatviles don’t seem
to have been buried here till the time of Queen
Anne.”</p>

<p>“Really, Marryatt?” said Carmichael. “That is
most interesting. They must have died abroad, I
fancy, for of course Protestant burial was the only
kind legal in England. Did it ever occur to you
how little early Renaissance architecture you find
in English villages? It’s an odd testimony, I think,
to the vitality of Catholicism. Puritanism must
have had something to do with it, of course, but
considering what an itch for architecture the
Renaissance brought with it, you would expect more
traces of it, if the Laudian religion had ever really
taken hold.”</p>

<p>“I think, to judge by the parish register, the
Oatviles must have been very staunch recusants,
and a great trouble to my predecessors. They
were important people, too, in the neighbourhood,
even before the great house was built, while they
lived here at the Dower-house.”</p>

<p>Gordon was not acquainted with the evening’s
programme till after dinner; he accepted his part
in it with a wry face; but with pleasurable tremors
of excitement. It would be the first time, he said,
his revolver would have been loaded since he shot
off his last cartridges in November, 1918. There
was a small, unoccupied room whose door faced that
of Reeves; this door habitually stood ajar, and there
was not much likelihood that any unauthorized
wanderer would trespass there. Gordon and Reeves
were to make their way there quietly at twelve
o’clock, and sit there in the dark till one. They
pleaded hard to be allowed to play bezique with
an electric torch, but Carmichael was firm. Even
whispering was not to be carried on except in case
of necessity, and to crown their privations, they were
warned not to smoke. Until twelve they sat playing
bridge in Reeves’ room with Marryatt: then the
company dispersed, although Carmichael insisted
on being left behind for a little, while Reeves and
Gordon went off and pretended to undress, “to make
sure,” he said, “that our visitor doesn’t arrive too
early.”</p>

<p>It is extraordinary what a lot you can hear, even
in a country house, when you sit for an hour in
the dark on the alert. Expresses whistled through
Paston Oatvile; and one goods train only passed its
signals after several stoppages, each of which meant
a repetition of the musical clink-clink-clink which
goods trucks make as they hit one another. A dog
somewhere at the back had a fit of loneliness, and
howled; cats told their nightly tale of love and
hate. Coals fell out of distant grates; the woodwork
creaked uncannily at intervals. But at no moment
was there a step in the passage: nor was any hand
laid on the door of the room opposite. They both
felt cramped and overwatched when one o’clock
sounded from the belfry of the old stables, and they
were free to creep back to their beds.</p>

<p>“I say,” whispered Reeves, “why not come into
my room and have a whisky-and-soda before we
turn in?”</p>

<p>“Oh,” replied Gordon, “didn’t Carmichael tell
you? We are not to go into your sitting-room on
any account.”</p>

<p>“The old brute!” said Mordaunt Reeves. “But I
suppose he knows what he’s doing.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch12">

<h2>Chapter XII. <br/> A Search with Piano Accompaniment</h2>

<p>If Carmichael let his colleagues in for a late
sitting, at least he made amends for it himself
by unwontedly early rising. Reeves found
him fully dressed when, pyjamaed himself, he set
out for his morning bath.</p>

<p>“What on earth are you doing,” he asked,
“wandering about at this hour?”</p>

<p>“Well, you see,” said Carmichael, “I had to go
and clear up your room before the housemaid came
in. Housemaids don’t like chewing-gum on their
boots.” And with this partial explanation Reeves
had to be satisfied till they sat down to smoke a
pipe after breakfast in a secluded corner of the
lounge.</p>

<p>“For Heaven’s sake let’s have an explanation,”
he urged. “There’s a chewing-gum <i lang="fr">motif</i> running
through life at present which is worrying me more
than I can say.”</p>

<p>“I don’t mind about that,” said Gordon; “what
worries me is Carmichael being up and dressed at
half-past seven.”</p>

<p>“Well, if you prefer it, let us put it this way,”
said Carmichael. “I had to get up early, Reeves,
to unlock your room; otherwise the maid wouldn’t
have been able to tidy it for you.”</p>

<p>“To unlock it? When did you lock it, then?”</p>

<p>“When I left it, to be sure, at twelve o’clock last
night.”</p>

<p>“What! Do you mean to say that Gordon and
I sat there for a solid hour waiting for somebody
to go into my room, when the door was locked
all the time? Look here, Carmichael, if you’ve
simply been pulling our legs——”</p>

<p>“No, I have not been pulling your legs, if I
apprehend rightly the meaning of that rather
puzzling metaphor. You were waiting for somebody
to <em>try</em> to get into your room; if he had tried, he
would have found two muscular young men tackling
him from behind, and the possibility of getting
through the door would have had a merely academic
interest.”</p>

<p>“But I thought you said we were to catch him
red-handed? Pretty good fools we should have
looked if we had found that it was some guest who’d
mistaken his room, or somebody who was wanting
to borrow a pipe-cleaner!”</p>

<p>“I admit it. But then, you see, I had an intuition,
almost amounting to a certainty, that the visitor
who intruded upon your room does not come in
through the door.”</p>

<p>“Oh, he doesn’t? Then you mean that Gordon
and I were merely sacrificed to your peculiar sense
of humour—we weren’t really doing any good?
My word, Carmichael——”</p>

<p>“You are always too hasty in leaping to
conclusions. You were doing a great deal of good by
sitting up in the room opposite. You were convincing
the mysterious gentleman that I expected him to
come through the door. And it was that conviction
which emboldened him to pay you a visit last night.
I am sorry to have practised any deception on you
two, but really it was the only means that occurred
to me for inducing the gentleman behind the scenes
to act as he did. And after all, I only made you sit
up for an hour.”</p>

<p>“An hour,” said Gordon, “cannot be properly
measured by the movements of a clock, an inanimate
thing which registers time but doesn’t <em>feel</em> it.
Many things lengthen time; but three things above
all, darkness, silence, and not smoking. The watch
we kept last night was a fair equivalent for three
hours over a fire with a pipe.”</p>

<p>“Well, I apologize. But you will be glad to hear
that the experiment succeeded. Somebody did come
into your room last night, Reeves, and wandered all
over it, though of course he found nothing that was
of the slightest interest to him, because there was
nothing to find.”</p>

<p>“And how do you know all this?”</p>

<p>“That is where the chewing-gum comes in.
Seccotine would have done: but chewing-gum is more
certain. I do not profess to understand why people
chew: my impression is that it is merely a kind of
fidgeting. Those people who talk about the
unconscious would probably tell you that all fidgeting is
a form of ‘compensation.’ Observe that word, for
it is the great hole in their logic. Their idea is that
So-and-so does not murder his grandmother, but he
does twiddle his thumbs. They will tell you,
consequently, that twiddling your thumbs is a kind of
compensation for not murdering your grandmother.
But the whole strength of their case should rest on
their ability to <em>prove</em> a connexion between the two
things, and instead of proving it you will find that
they steadily assume it. However, as I was saying—the
peculiarity of van Beuren’s special chewing-gum
is this: that it can be drawn out to an almost
indefinite length, and forms a thread of almost
invisible fineness. If you stretch such threads, say,
between one chair and another all over a room, as
I did round your room, Reeves, last night, the great
probability is that a casual visitor will walk into it
and carry whole strands of it away with him,
without noticing anything peculiar.”</p>

<p>“What!” said Reeves, “you mean like Sherlock
Holmes and the cigarette-ash on the carpet?”</p>

<p>“It was not one of Holmes’ more original
performances. He had been anticipated, in point of
fact, by the prophet Daniel. You should read the
story of Bel and the Dragon, Reeves.”</p>

<p>“And now,” said Gordon, “I suppose we proceed
to the station, and take a good look at the
trouser-ends of all our club-fellows as they wait for the
London train?”</p>

<p>“Why, no. I do not think that method would be
very fruitful. My idea was not to discover <em>who</em> it is
that visits Reeves’ room, but to make sure that there
is somebody who does so, and that he does not come
through the door.”</p>

<p>“In fact, that he comes through the window?”</p>

<p>“No, my dear Gordon, it is not everybody who
has your agility in negotiating windows. The
windows in question are a good twenty feet from the
ground; there is no drain-pipe near them; and
anyone who attempted to put a ladder up to them would
leave traces among the begonias beneath which even
a caddy would not find it difficult to follow up.”</p>

<p>“Well, come on, don’t be so mysterious. What is
it? A secret passage?”</p>

<p>“That seems to be the only sensible solution.
One does not, of course, expect a secret passage in
a club-house. But then, you see, this is not like
other club-houses, and you, Reeves, must have been
struck like myself by the significance of what
Marryatt was saying last night.”</p>

<p>“What was Marryatt saying last night?”</p>

<p>“Why, that the Oatviles were Catholics, nay, were
noted Recusants, right up to the time of the third
William. That means, of course, that they
harboured priests; and you could not harbour priests
within this distance of London without having a
priests’ hiding-hole. There was a man, his name
escapes me at the moment, who made it his special
business to go about constructing these hiding-holes.
A priori, then, it is fairly certain that there must
be some architectural secret about the old
manor-house of the Oatviles. And perhaps in this case
they ran to a secret passage.”</p>

<p>“Reeves, my boy,” said Gordon, “you’ll have to
keep this dark, or they’ll be putting up the rent of
your rooms.”</p>

<p>Reeves still seemed a little dissatisfied. “But
surely, Carmichael, while we were about it we could
have kept watch in the room itself, and seen where
the hiding-place is, and who comes out of it.”</p>

<p>“We could have tried. But tell me: how much of
our conversation does this gentleman overhear?
And whereabouts in your room could you have
hidden with any safety? Honestly, I don’t believe
he would have come out except while he knew that
you and Gordon were busy watching the wrong side
of the door.”</p>

<p>“You’re assuming, of course, that he can’t have
got in at the door by a duplicate key after Reeves
and I went to bed?”</p>

<p>“I am not assuming that, I know it. I took the
liberty of putting a bit of that useful chewing-gum
across the lock of the door, and it was still
undisturbed in the morning. Whereas the chewing-gum
which stretched between the chairs had been
ploughed up in every direction.”</p>

<p>“As it is, though, we’ve still got to find the
entrance to the passage.”</p>

<p>“As you say. I thought we might spend a happy
morning looking for it. Let’s see, there is a piano
in your rooms; do you play it?”</p>

<p>“Very badly.”</p>

<p>“That’s exactly what we want.”</p>

<p>“How do you mean?”</p>

<p>“Why, if you sit in your rooms playing the piano,
the gentleman on the other side of the partition will
probably assume that nothing much is happening.
If you play it loudly, you will drown any little
thumping noises we may happen to make. And if
you play it very badly, the gentleman on the other
side, if he is at all musical, will probably retreat
to the utmost limits of his hiding-place.”</p>

<p>“But look here,” said Gordon, “we’re not certain
this man is the murderer. Is it quite humane——”</p>

<p>“Oh, shut up,” said Mordaunt Reeves. “You’re
right, Carmichael, as usual. What’s wrong with
starting now?”</p>

<p>Reeves, it must be confessed, did his part of the
programme admirably. He even sang to his own
accompaniment. When he got to “Land of Hope
and Glory,” Gordon asked if he might not have
cotton-wool in his ears. He also expressed a fear
that all the other residents would come in asking
Reeves to stop. But fortunately it was a time of
day at which the residents are either in London on
business, or going round the links like sensible men.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, under cover of Reeves’ barrage, the
search was proceeding busily. “The ceiling,” said
Carmichael, “is out of the question. Even if there
was a concealed trap-door in it, it would be too
risky to let down ladders and pull them up again.
Now, how about the floor? There’s this felt
under-carpet—I suppose that’s nailed down all right,
Reeves?”</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">“Wider sti-ill, and wider,” sang Reeves,</p>
<p class="i2">“Nailed it down myself;</p>
<p class="i1">Bought it Tottenham Court Road</p>
<p class="i2">Just a yea-ear ago.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>“Well, nobody’s been in a position to take liberties
with the carpet, that’s clear, and it goes right up to
the edges of the floor, so I think we may rule the
floor out too. Now, Gordon, you’ve four walls to
choose from—one with the door in it, one opposite
with the windows in it, one with the fireplace in it,
and one blank, where the book-case stands. Which
are you betting on?”</p>

<p>“I’m not betting on any. But I’m maintaining
that the door wall is the one to search first, because
we’ve only to open the door to see what thickness
it is.”</p>

<p>“There’s something in that. Hullo! The door
does stand in a bit of a recess. Where’s that tape
measure? A foot and a half—hardly good enough,
is it? You see, if you tap the panelling here the
sound is quite dull, and that means there’s brick
behind the panelling. And there’s something thicker
than mere plaster on the passage side too. The
mysterious gentleman can’t be quite as thin as all
that. No bulges in the wall, except of course that
big oak chest. Do you know what’s inside that
chest, Reeves?”</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">“Yes, I ken that chest, it’s as full as can be</p>
<p class="i1">With my own odds and ends, and it’s all full of drawers,</p>
<p class="i1">And the key’s on the mantelpiece if you don’t believe me</p>
<p class="i2">With his hounds and his horn in the morning,”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p class="noindent">was the reassuring, if not very metrical, reply.</p>

<p>“Then that does for the wall. Now, the window
wall’s thick; you can see that from the window
recesses. On the other hand, it’s got to carry the
thickness of the outer wall, and the outer walls of
Tudor buildings are generally pretty thick.
Artillery, you see, had abolished the castle idea, but from
force of habit they went on making their outside
walls thick, because you never knew what might
happen. And of course some of these brick houses
did stand siege—you know Aston Hall, I expect, in
Birmingham. It sounds genuine when you tap it,
doesn’t it?”</p>

<p>“Yes,” said Gordon, listening. “Besides, if you
come to think of it, this house is pre-Reformation.
There was no reason why they should want a secret
passage in it when it was built. But when the bad
times started, and they wanted a refuge for the
priests, the man who came to build the hiding-place
wouldn’t play any tricks with a great solid outside
wall. He would surely run up a false partition
between two rooms.”</p>

<p>“Admirable,” said Carmichael. “It looks as if
we should have to trespass on Reeves’ neighbours.
Reeves, who lives in the rooms next yours?”</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">“The one on the left,” <b>sang Reeves,</b> “is Colonel Steele;</p>
<p class="i2">I fancy you both must know him,</p>
<p class="i1">And Mr. Murdoch’s on the right,</p>
<p class="i2">He plays the ’cello, blow him!</p>
<p class="i1">Both of them work in London Town,</p>
<p class="i2">So they’re both of them out this morning;</p>
<p class="i1">Of that there is no matter of doubt,</p>
<p class="i1">No possible, probable shadow of doubt,</p>
<p class="i2">No manner of doubt whatever.”</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>“Good,” said Gordon. “I’ll step the rooms, shall
I, while you step the passage? We hardly need the
tape-measure yet.”</p>

<p>“Better do both, if you won’t mind; then the pace
will be the same.” And Carmichael busied himself
in wandering round the room looking for cracks till
Gordon reappeared. “Well,” he said, “what news?”</p>

<p>“The fireplace wall, I fancy,” said Gordon.
“From the door of Colonel Steele’s room to the door
of this, walking down the passage, it takes twelve
strides. Inside his room, I only take five strides
to the wall. Inside this room, I take a bit over five
strides to the same wall. Therefore there must be
a thickness of about a pace and a half between
Colonel Steele’s room and Reeves’. Now one comes
to think of it, he wouldn’t hear Murdock’s ’cello if
there was that thickness the other side.”</p>

<p>“A pace and a half? The priests must have been
on the thin side. Yes, that would be it: there must
be a length of about ten feet from the fireplace to
the wall on the side of the fireplace opposite to the
window. Somewhere in that ten feet we’ve got to
find the spring.”</p>

<p>“Good heavens!” said Gordon suddenly, “suppose
there’s a sliding panel.”</p>

<p>“A man couldn’t get through one of these
panels—not even you, Gordon, in your well-known
human-cobra act,” said Reeves, who had stopped singing
for the moment.</p>

<p>“No, but a man might put his arm through it,
and take the photograph away, and put another in
its place, while the people in the room were closely
occupied—arranging their hands at bridge, for
example.”</p>

<p>“You’ve got it!” said Carmichael. “But why,
why?” He and Gordon both went to the spot where
the photograph had rested on the cornice two nights
before. There was a crack near it, through which
it might be possible for a man standing in the dark
beyond to keep a watch on the inside of the room,
but this crack seemed to hold no further secret. It
was Gordon who eventually, fingering the little
mouldings on the lower side of the cornice, found one
which pushed upwards, acting as a sort of latch. A
little tug at the remaining mouldings made the panel
turn sideways and disclose a triangular opening of a
few inches across, through which Reeves’ vociferous
rendering of “Annie Laurie” burst into the stillness
of the priests’ hiding-place.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch13">

<h2>Chapter XIII. <br/> The Man in the Passage</h2>

<p>“Well,” said Gordon, “what do we do
next?”</p>

<p>“The first thing,” said Carmichael,
“is to shut up this hole again exactly as it was.
The next thing is to discuss what we do next. And,
Reeves, I think it might be best if you went on
playing for a little.”</p>

<p>“If music be the food of detection,” agreed
Gordon, “play on. Give us excess of it, that
surfeiting the mysterious gentleman behind the
panelling may sicken, and so die. Well, he can’t have
come through that hole, can he?”</p>

<p>“No,” said Carmichael, “but there’s certain to
be another catch just inside which will open the
secret door. You see, that hole is obviously for a
man to put his arm through. And as the arm-hole
opens from this side, the catch of the door will
clearly open from the other. But, just personally,
I don’t very much want to open that door without,
considering first what we’re going to find on the
other side. Is the man armed, for example? Is
there likely to be another opening he can escape
through? I confess to an aversion from taking any
risks.”</p>

<p>“If he came here straight from the railway,” said
Reeves from the piano, “he wouldn’t be likely to
have any fire-arms with him.”</p>

<p>“But you forget,” said Gordon, “he must have
an accomplice outside; somebody who brings him
food—why not weapons too?”</p>

<p>“It’s a conceivable plan,” said Carmichael, “to
keep a look-out and catch this confederate of his.
Because the confederate presumably uses some other
entrance, and if we found that . . .”</p>

<p>“We could wait at that end, and let Reeves go
on playing the piano to him; he couldn’t stick it
much longer. No, that’s all very well, but I really
think we ought to do something at once, before this
man sees that there’s something up, and possibly
makes a bolt for it. I know the direct method
sounds silly, but I propose that we should go in and
take a look round. I don’t mind going first.”</p>

<p>“I don’t see much good in all three of us going
in. What happens if our man breaks cover through
the other entrance? You see, it may be a member
of the club all the time; who could turn up smiling
at the other end, and nobody have a right to question
him.”</p>

<p>“One moment,” said Carmichael. “Now we come
to think of it, we do know where the other end of
the passage was. We know that the old chapel was
the present billiard-room. Why not lock this door,
and go down to have a look at the billiard-room?
You and Gordon can have a game, or pretend to,
while I take a look round the walls.”</p>

<p>This adjustment was agreed upon, and they found
the billiard-room unoccupied. It seemed, however,
to show signs of recent habitation, for the dust-cloth
had been taken off the table, the balls were out, and
a cue laid across one corner as if to indicate that
they were not to be disturbed. But this was voted
accidental: the red was on spot, and the plain ball
spotted in balk; spot was in balk, obviously as the
result of a deliberate miss. And a glance at the
score-board showed that spot had not scored, while
plain had scored one from spot’s miss. In fact, it
appeared that two people had started a game, and
interrupted it after the first stroke, a miss in balk.</p>

<p>“Come on,” said Gordon: “nobody can want to
have those balls left undisturbed.” And the two
proceeded to play, with a good deal of noisy
conversation, while Carmichael investigated the walls.</p>

<p>“You see,” he said, “the same old pattern of
cornice in the panelling. With any luck the spring
will be the same.” And, sure enough, before ten
minutes were up he had identified the spring.</p>

<p>“That settles it,” said Gordon. “We’ll get
Marryatt, and he and Carmichael can keep watch
outside the billiard-room door. Reeves and I will
go down the passage from upstairs, with an electric
torch: my experience of fighting in the dark is that
the man who has got the electric torch, so that he
can see and can’t be seen, has got the upper hand
from the start.”</p>

<p>Marryatt was found without difficulty, and
consented to mount guard after a minimum of
explanation. Carmichael was provided with a revolver,
chiefly <i lang="la">ad terrorem</i>, for he had no idea how to use
it; Marryatt, true to medieval principle, was only
armed with a niblick. Gordon took another
revolver and an electric torch, and went back again
with Reeves to the upper opening. When the panel
had been pushed back, it needed but a little
fumbling on the inner side to discover a latch. When
this was lifted, they found that the wall opposite
them yielded to the touch, and a whole section of
the panelling turned on a vertical axis, the right
side of it coming outwards into the room, the left
vanishing into the passage. The work was of
miraculous fineness, and when they shut the door
again they had difficulty in seeing where the cracks
came in the morticing of the old beams.</p>

<p>“Those priests were well hidden,” said Gordon.
“I imagine the people who hunted them out simply
broke down all this stuff with hatchets. But the
Secretary could hardly approve of that. Otherwise,
I suppose we’re very much in the position of the
Sheriff’s men.”</p>

<p>“And the man inside is very much in the position
of the priest.”</p>

<p>“Except for one circumstance.”</p>

<p>“Namely?”</p>

<p>“Guilt,” said Gordon.</p>

<p>“Well, what happens next?”</p>

<p>“A little Dutch courage.” Gordon helped himself
to a liberal glass of neat whisky. “If I were
Carmichael, you would have a little lecture at this
point on the origin of the phrase ‘Dutch courage.’
Dating, you see, my dear Reeves, from the
seventeenth century, the last time when we were seriously
at war with the Dutch. Meanwhile, I wish we were
still at war with the Germans, and this were a
German dug-out. Because then we should simply
stand at the entrance with a bomb and tell them
to come out. But there again I suppose the
Secretary wouldn’t be best pleased—really, he’s becoming
a nuisance, that Secretary.”</p>

<p>“You still haven’t told me how we’re going to
proceed.”</p>

<p>“We proceed with me in front and you behind.
I have the revolver, you have the electric torch.
You hold it at arm’s length, just in front of my
shoulder. That ought to puzzle the other man if
it comes to shooting. Conversation will be
conducted in a low tone of voice. If we find nobody
there, we emerge at the billiard-room end, and tell
Carmichael he’s a fool.”</p>

<p>“Good. I’m not really certain, when all’s said
and done, that I really want to meet this man.
Curiosity has its limits, I find.”</p>

<p>“Well, are you ready? Flash the light into the
passage as soon as I open the door. Then let me
go in first, and follow up close.”</p>

<p>The passage was startlingly high, having the
whole height of the outer room. It was so narrow
that you instinctively edged sideways along it,
though there was just room to walk breast-forward
and avoid contact with the cobweb-matted walls.
It began to descend almost immediately, by a
series of wooden steps; and by a rough calculation
Gordon made out that they were below the level
of Reeves’ floor by the time they had reached the
parallel of Reeves’ inner wall. At this point they
had to stoop, a circumstance which rather confused
their plan of campaign; and it was clear that this
part of the hiding-place was substracted, not from
the thickness of the walls but from the depth of
the floor. There was a sharp turn to the right,
which showed that they were now following the
course of the passage which led past Reeves’ room.
The dust on the floor of the passage was thick and
fine, easily showing the traces of confused, but
recent, human footprints.</p>

<p>Quite suddenly the passage opened out to the
left, and at the same time a very meagre ray of
light from outside attracted their attention. They
found a chamber some seven feet square, with a tiny
squint to let in the light, from some unnoticeable
chink in the brickwork of the outer wall. The
height of this chamber was still such that a
full-grown man could not stand up without stooping,
but the presence of light and air made it contrast
agreeably with the passage outside. Some attempt,
too, had been made to sweep the floor, the dust
being all brushed up into a pile at one corner.
There could be no doubt that this chamber had been
the refuge of hunted priests three centuries back;
no doubt, either, that it had been the refuge of a
hunted man within the last few days past.</p>

<p>Of the former occupation, indeed, there were few
signs. A scratch had been made now and again
in the plaster of the walls, giving a name in initials—a
tourist’s trick, but rescued from vulgarity by
the circumstances of its origin, and by the addition
of a few Christian symbols—a Cross several times,
and once the IHS monogram. Just where the light
of the little window fell strongest, a few lines of
pious doggerel had been scrawled, difficult to read
in their crabbed seventeenth-century handwriting.
A sconce for a candle, nailed into the wall, was the
only solid monument left of these distant memories.</p>

<p>The eye was more immediately challenged by
the evidences of a recent visitor’s presence. One
expected a rude pallet of straw; a simpler
resting-place had been contrived with three cushions
obviously looted from the club lounge. There was
a candle-end stuck in an empty claret-bottle, and
two candles in reserve. There were numerous
cigarette-ends thrown carelessly on and around the
dust-heap at the corner; all these were of a common
and undistinctive brand. There was a rather
crumpled copy of Friday’s <i>Daily Mail</i>, probably
derived from the same source as the cushions.
There was a tin of boot-polish and a brush, as if
the stranger had been careful about his appearance
even in these singular surroundings. These relics
Reeves quickly reviewed with absorbed interest, and
then turned to Gordon in despair.</p>

<p>“All these traces,” he said, “and not one that
you could call a clue. If the man has escaped us,
he has escaped us without leaving a solitary hint
of his identity.”</p>

<p>“That hardly surprises me,” said Gordon. “Of
course the man has been in a sense your guest,
but you could hardly expect him to sit down and
write you a Collins.”</p>

<p>“One might have expected one crow of triumph.”</p>

<p>“Perhaps that was one in the billiard-room.”</p>

<p>“In the billiard-room?”</p>

<p>“Yes, somebody had left you a miss in balk.”</p>

<p>“Do you really think . . .”</p>

<p>“Oh, I don’t know. Let’s go on exploring.”</p>

<p>All this time, except for their own whispers, there
had been no noise in the secret passage. Through
the little window sounds came from a distance,
rarefied as sounds are when they come through a
small opening. A motor-cycle hooted several times:
somebody shouted “Fore!” on the links: far below
(as it seemed) somebody was filling a bucket.
They crept out again into the passage, the torch
switched on again: for some twenty paces they were
on the level, then they began to descend, and almost
immediately the ceiling grew higher above them—they
were in a wall-space instead of a floor-space
once more. Just as they reached the foot of the
steps, an unforeseen development threw all their
plans into confusion—the passage branched in two
directions, one branch going straight on, the other
turning off sharply to the right.</p>

<p>“What do we do here?” whispered Reeves, flashing
the torch up either corridor in turn. “Whichever
way we go, it seems to me, we may be taken
from the rear.”</p>

<p>“I know; we must chance it. We can’t separate,
because we’ve only got one torch. We’ll try the
branch that goes straight on, but be ready to turn
round at a moment’s notice.”</p>

<p>This passage, after a short distance, seemed to
terminate in a blank wall. But there was a crack
in the wall and Gordon, bending down, saw through
the crack the billiard-room as they had left it a
quarter of an hour ago, the balls still in position,
the door still shut behind which Carmichael and
Marryatt were on guard.</p>

<p>“Switch the light higher up,” he whispered.</p>

<p>Surely Reeves’ torch was giving more light than
usual? It seemed to have suddenly doubled its
brightness. And then, just as he realized that
another torch had been turned on from behind them,
a strange voice came out of the darkness:</p>

<p>“Now then, you there, I’ve got you covered. You
this side, drop that torch. . . . That’s right: now,
you in front, put that revolver down. . . . Now
turn and go back the way you came.”</p>

<p>It was humiliating, but there was nothing to be
done. They had been taken in the rear by somebody
coming up the other arm of the passage; they
could see nothing of him, looking straight into the
light of his torch. He stood at the junction of
the two branches to let them pass, still invisible:
as they went back on their tracks, Gordon had a
wild idea of doubling into the priests’ room, but
he saw it would be hopeless. He would be unarmed,
caught in a trap, with a man who was probably
already a murderer covering him with a revolver.
They went on, an ignominious procession, right up
to the opening in Reeves’ room, which they had left
ajar behind them.</p>

<p>“Step right out,” said the voice, “and don’t stir
till I tell you.”</p>

<p>Obediently they crept out into Reeves’ room,
expecting the stranger to shut the door behind them
and fasten it in some way still unknown to them.
It was a surprise to both of them when the secret
entrance was once more blocked with the shadow
of a human form, and they were followed into the
daylight by a quite unmistakable policeman.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch14">

<h2>Chapter XIV. <br/> A Chase, ending with a Surprise</h2>

<p>“Now then,” said the policeman, falling back
on a formula in face of an unexpected
situation. “What’s all this about?”</p>

<p>There can be no doubt that, on most occasions,
the sense of humour is a handicap in life. It
implies introspection, and he who introspects is
commonly lost. But laughter is, in great part, the child
of innocence, and it is doubtful if anything could
have exculpated the two amateur detectives from
the charge of being criminals so speedily as the
complete break-down of Gordon’s gravity when the
question was asked.</p>

<p>“What are you doing in these rooms?” asked
the policeman, less suspicious but by no means more
friendly.</p>

<p>“Well, you see,” said Reeves, “they’re my rooms.”</p>

<p>“I ought to warn you,” the policeman pointed
out, “that this may involve you in a serious charge.
We have reason to think that a murderer has been
hiding in that passage there. Say nothing if you
don’t want it to be used as evidence.” And he
took out the inevitable note-book which is the
policeman’s substitute for a thunderbolt.</p>

<p>“I’m sorry, officer,” said Gordon, “but you must
see that we’ve been going round one another in
circles. You’re looking for a murderer—let me
make a rash guess, and put it to you that it’s
Brotherhood’s murderer you’re looking for? Well,
we’re doing exactly the same. It seems that, by
a mere chance, he’s been taking refuge in a passage
which communicates with this room which is rented
by Mr. Reeves here. And instead of finding the
murderer, we’ve found one another.”</p>

<p>“Very irregular, gentlemen. You know as well
as I do that if you’ve any information in your
possession which might lead to the conviction of
the criminal, it’s your duty to communicate it to
the police. Of course, I’m very sorry if I gave you
gentlemen a fright, but you’ve got to look at it
this way, Whose business is it to see justice done,
yours or mine? You see, if it hadn’t been for you
gentlemen giving the alarm, not meaning to, I’m
not saying you meant to, but if you gentlemen
hadn’t given the alarm, I might have got this chap
bottled up properly in the passage there; and now
how am I to know where he is? That’s the way
you’ve got to look at it.”</p>

<p>“But the coroner’s jury brought in a verdict of
suicide,” objected Reeves.</p>

<p>“Ah, that may be; but you see it’s this way,
the Force isn’t tied down by what the coroner’s jury
says, and if the Force has its suspicions, then it
acts accordingly; and if anybody else has their
suspicions, then it’s their duty to communicate them to
the police, d’you see? And then the police can act
accordingly.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’m very sorry if we’ve interfered with
your plans at all,” said Gordon, seeing that the
Olympian rage was taking its normal course, and
simmering down into a flood of explanatory
platitude. “We were meaning to take a little something
after all that hunting about in the wainscoting; it’s
dusty work. I suppose it’s no good asking you to
join us, Inspector?”</p>

<p>“Sergeant, sir, is what I am. Of course, it’s
against the regulations, strictly speaking, when on
duty; but if you was to offer me something just to
show there’s no offence taken, why then I won’t say
No to a glass.” And, as the pledge of amity began
to flow, Jove ratified his compact by the infallible
formula, “Here’s to your very good health,
gentlemen.”</p>

<p>Reeves felt that the moment had arrived for
cooperating with Scotland Yard. The fact that
Scotland Yard, with no golf balls and no photographs
to guide it, no Carmichael and no chewing-gum to
aid it, had after all got on the track of the right
criminal, began to impress him.</p>

<p>“Well, Sergeant,” he said, “there’s not much sense
in either of us playing a lone hand, is there? What
I’m asking myself is, why shouldn’t you and we hunt
in couples?”</p>

<p>“Very sorry, sir; of course, any information you
may see fit to give the police will be acted on
accordingly; but you see it’s against our regulations
to take civilians about with us when we’re on duty,
that’s how it is. Not but what, as it’s all between
friends, I don’t mind taking you gentlemen
downstairs and showing you the other door of that there
passage as you didn’t see and I came in by.”</p>

<p>The fact that Carmichael was still at his useless
post occurred to the two friends at this point, and
made them consent to the indignity of a personally
conducted tour. “In a cellar the other door is,
but it’s a cellar you have to get to from the outside,”
the sergeant explained, leading the way downstairs.
They were not destined to complete, on that
occasion, their experiences of the passage. They had
only just got out of the front door when the
whirlwind figure of a second policeman almost cannoned
into them, and their attention was directed to a
motor-cycle, with side-car, just disappearing through
the lodge gates.</p>

<p>“It’s ’im,” panted the new-comer. “Gone off on
the blinking bus!”</p>

<p>The mystery man had disappeared, and disappeared,
with singular effrontery, on the very vehicle
on which the representatives of the law had come
to track him down.</p>

<p>“Come on, Sergeant,” shouted Reeves, rising to
the occasion. “I’ve got my car only just round here,
and she’ll do a better pace than anything else you
could pick up!” And, while the agitated sergeant
explained to Gordon the message he wanted
telephoned to the station at Binver, Reeves did a record
time in starting and bringing round to the front
his new Tarquin “Superbus.” It was scarcely three
minutes since the disappearance of the adventurous
stranger when the two policemen, one at Reeves’
side and one luxuriously cushioned in the tonneau,
bounded off down the drive in pursuit.</p>

<p>“What does that car of yours do, Sergeant?
Forty? I can knock fifty out of this easily, as
long as we don’t get held up anywhere. I say, what
happens if some of your friends want to run me in
for furious driving?”</p>

<p>“You’d get off with a caution, sir, and it wouldn’t
be in the papers. You’re all right, don’t you worry,
as long as you don’t run into anything.” Indeed,
at the pace Reeves was making, it seemed highly
desirable that they should not. The motor-cycle
was still out of sight, and it seemed likely enough
that they were on a forlorn quest. About half a
mile from the Club the road split into two, either
branch joining the main London road, but one going
southwards and one going northwards to meet it.
Would the fugitive make for the crowded suburbs,
or for the open country to the north? The question
was fortunately decided for them when they saw a
more than usually self-diffusive herd of sheep
blocking up the northern arm. Nobody in a hurry would
have tried to penetrate that bleating barrage when
he saw a Clear road to his right. Whatever his
plans had been, it must have been the London
direction he had taken. In a moment they had
dived under the railway close to Paston Oatvile
station, and swept round into the open current of the
London main road.</p>

<p>Saturday was not yet far advanced enough to
have released its stream of pleasure-traffic, so late
in the year especially. Their right of way was
disputed only by occasional lorries and market-carts.
Two motor-cycles they overhauled, with a spasm of
hope each time, which died down upon a nearer
view. The road was for the most part a gentle
switchback, rising and falling over the long folds of
the countryside, and at the top of each incline their
eyes swept the stretch in front of them for a sight
of the fugitive. The surface in front of the engine
seemed to spring into a cascade and jumped out on
you suddenly; the sere hedges became streaks of
gold.</p>

<p>They had gone ten miles without sighting their
quarry, and the sergeant began to grow anxious.
“The expresses stop at Weighford,” he said, “and
that’s only a mile or two on.” He turned to his
colleague behind. “D’you remember what time the
express from the north stops at Weighford?
Quarter to twelve? That’s bad. You see, sir, if he
gets to Weighford before we catch sight of him, he
may drive through it or he may turn aside to the
station; and if he makes for the station he’ll most
likely catch the express for London.”</p>

<p>“So can we, if we don’t get held up at
Weighford. A quarter to twelve, did you say? I think
we ought to do it. But if we don’t sight him first,
it’s a bad look-out. What’s that on ahead?”</p>

<p>“That’s not the one, sir. Ah, there’s the goods
sidings; express isn’t signalled yet.”</p>

<p>Weighford is a straggling, unpleasant town, which
seems to cast a blight on the road as it passes
through, and they were mercilessly bumped. More
than once, too, they had to slow down; and finally,
to crown their disappointment, they saw the gates
of a level-crossing shut against them. Then, just
as Reeves was slowing down, the gates began to
swing open, and the sergeant suddenly crowed with
delight. “That’s him, sir! Got held up at the level
crossing, and now he’s only half a minute’s start
of us.”</p>

<p>The remainder of the race was a thing only to be
remembered in nightmares—the children that only
just got out of the way in time, the dog that didn’t;
the lorry that wanted to turn in the middle of the
road. . . . But they had their man marked now,
and could see that he was making for the railway;
could hear, too, the whistle of the express and the
grinding of the brakes as it slowed down into the
station. At the further platform a quiet, rural train
with the label <b>Binver</b> was sitting on its haunches
and panting after the exhaustion of its last
five-mile crawl. The station-master was fortunately
found, and the progress of the express held up in
the interests of a police search. The fugitive had
left the side-car standing at the entrance and lost
himself among the passengers before his pursuers
could alight.</p>

<p>The search, laboriously and muddle-headedly
carried on with the aid of the station officials, lasted
some five minutes without any result. Fussy
passengers might have been paid by the criminal to
delay operations, so ready were they with helpful
advice. At last an inspector pointed to a door on
the non-platform side of an empty first-class
carriage, which was unfastened.</p>

<p>“Got through on to the six-foot way, that’s what
he’s done, and slinking round on the other
platform maybe.”</p>

<p>“Wrong!” shouted Reeves in a flash of inspiration;
“he got through into the Binver train just
as it went off, and hadn’t time to shut the door
properly. Sergeant, it’s us for the road again!”
The sergeant hesitated, then allowed himself to be
fascinated by the theory. The station staff was
left with orders to go on searching; the side-car
was entrusted to the Weighford police, and, within
a quarter of an hour of their arrival, Reeves and
the two Binver policemen were tearing back along
the main road as fast as they had come down it.</p>

<p>Local trains waste most of their time waiting
at stations and chatting to the signalman. When
they are on the move, they are not really easy to
catch even with a fast motor, especially when they
have nearly ten minutes’ start. There was no stop,
so far as this train was concerned, between
Weighford and Paston Oatvile. Paston Oatvile had, of
course, been warned to hold up the train on arrival,
but the staff there was neither numerous nor
intelligent, and it seemed very probable that the
elusive passenger would be on his travels again, if
they could not be on the platform to intercept him.
This time Reeves excelled himself and so did the
Tarquin. There was no doubt about the objective;
no mental undercurrent of hesitancy to breed infirmity
of purpose. The driver himself became part of
the machine, a mere lever in the relentless engine
of human justice. Almost all the way the line was
visible from the road; and as reach after reach
of it was disclosed, three pairs of eyes searched for
the puff of smoke that would mark the Binver train.</p>

<p>They saw it at last when they were a full mile off.
A moment more, and they were at the station gates
almost before the wheels of the train had stopped.
Three harassed officials were explaining to irritated
passengers that they must keep their seats, please.
And so began the cruel, inevitable search for the
traveller without a ticket. They found him at last,
sitting apparently unconcerned in a first-class
carriage; the police did not bring him out, but climbed
in after him. Reeves went up to endure the
effusive gratitude of the sergeant, and caught sight,
as he did so, of the prisoner’s face.</p>

<p>It was Davenant.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch15">

<h2>Chapter XV. <br/> Gordon takes the Opportunity to Philosophize</h2>

<p>“It seems,” said Carmichael, blinking through
his spectacles, “that I have been mistaken.
My old tutor always used to say to me—that
was Benger: I suppose he’d be before your
time, Gordon? Of course he was—Benger always
used to say to me, ‘Mr. Carmichael, always follow
your nose. You’ve got a straight nose, Mr.
Carmichael, but a crooked brain.’ Very witty old chap
he was, Benger, always saying things like that.”</p>

<p>“It was a dashed funny mistake, too,” mused
Reeves. “Do you realize that, quite possibly,
Davenant may have stood behind that hole in the wall
and heard us coming solemnly to the conclusion
that he didn’t exist? That he never had existed,
except as a sort of spiritual projection of old
Brotherhood, and now, consequently, he had ceased to
exist?”</p>

<p>“And what is still more singular,” said Carmichael,
“is that so far from helping the cause of justice,
we seem to have actually hindered it. For I take
it there can be little doubt that it was our tapping
and measuring upstairs which put Davenant on
his guard and made him bolt.”</p>

<p>“Tapping? Measuring?” protested Gordon.
“Don’t you believe it; it was Reeves singing. I
always said the man would beat it if we let Reeves
go on like that. I’d have done the same myself.”</p>

<p>“I’m not at all sure,” said Reeves, “that he may
not have found the chewing-gum on his trousers,
and formed his own conclusions that way.
However, there isn’t very much harm done. The police
have got their man, with no great inconvenience
to anybody except that poor old collie at Weighford.
Rather a fine dog it was, and the owner wasn’t a
bit nice about it when I saw him.”</p>

<p>“I suppose,” Carmichael asked, “that the police
can actually prove Davenant was the murderer?”</p>

<p>“Not a bit of it,” said Reeves confidently,
“unless they’ve got more up their sleeve than I think
they have.”</p>

<p>“But surely,” urged Gordon, “if he went to all
the trouble of hiding himself like a rat in the
wainscoting——”</p>

<p>“That’s all very well, but they haven’t even
proved Davenant was the man in the passage. You
see, Davenant was travelling on that train, but it’s
the train he always does come up by every
Saturday. He might say that he hadn’t had time to get
his ticket; that he had come all the way from
London; that the real murderer must have slipped
out on to the six-foot way and lost himself on the
opposite platform. I don’t know that he will say
that; of course, he is reserving his defence. But
even if they can bring people to prove—people who
saw him boarding the train at Weighford—that
he was the man we were pursuing, it still doesn’t
follow that he was the murderer. It’s extraordinary,
the shifts men have resorted to before now when
they thought they were going to be accused of
murder, although they were as innocent as you or me.
Put it this way—suppose Davenant had actually
come up by that train on Tuesday, for reasons best
known to himself. He gets to Paston Whitchurch,
and then hears of what we found at the third tee.
He cannot give any plausible explanation of his
coming back here on Tuesday at all. He has some
grudge against Brotherhood which we know nothing
about. Now, if he can conceal the fact that he came
back here at all that day, he escapes suspicion. He
knows, somehow, about this secret passage; knows
that, as a member of the club, he can wander about
here pretty safely without attracting attention. He
decides to lie low in the priests’ hiding-place till
Saturday, and then turn up bright and smiling,
knowing nothing about the murder. I say, innocent
men have done stranger things before now.”</p>

<p>“It sounds pretty thin to me,” said Gordon.</p>

<p>“Once more I tell you, it is a fatal habit to
proceed from observation to inference, and give
inference the name of fact. You say Davenant is
the murderer; I say, we don’t know that; we only
know that Davenant was a man who for some
reason expected to be accused of the murder, and
consequently behaved in a very peculiar way.”</p>

<p>“I still don’t quite see,” said Carmichael, “what
exactly happened while I was waiting outside the
billiard-room door.”</p>

<p>“Nothing happened while you were waiting outside
the billiard-room door; it had all happened
already. Quite early on, while we were worrying
about up here, Davenant saw that the place was
unhealthy for him. He wandered out into the
billiard-room, arranging the balls, I think, as a kind
of message for us, and then strolled off
somewhere—into the servants’ quarters, I suppose. It’s
obvious that he must have had a confederate in the
house. Then the police came—I imagine they must
have watched somebody bringing him things from
outside.”</p>

<p>“Sullivan,” said Gordon. “That was what he was
doing, obviously, the day I was over in Davenant’s
cottage, he was taking him collars and things.”</p>

<p>“Anyhow, the police came and climbed in at
the cellar, making a great song and dance about it
as the police always do. Davenant saw that things
were getting pretty serious, so he made for the
nearest motor-bike he could find—I don’t know
whether he knew it belonged to the police or not.
Having once started to run away, of course he
couldn’t very well stop at Weighford and tell us
it was all a silly mistake: having started to bolt,
he had to go on bolting. And he did it damned
cleverly: if he’d had time to shut the door of the
carriage in the express, or had a season ticket to
justify his presence in the Binver train, how could
he have been caught? That was the train he always
came back by on Saturdays.”</p>

<p>“I don’t think he would have escaped,” said
Carmichael. “Truth will out—there’s a lot in the
old saying. By the way, I wonder if either of you
know the origin of the phrase <i lang="la">magna est veritas et
prævalebit</i>, or rather <i lang="la">prævalet</i>, to give the exact
form?”</p>

<p>“We’ll buy it,” said Gordon.</p>

<p>“Actually it comes from the third book of
Esdras. That’s a thing ninety-nine people out of a
hundred don’t know. But what was I saying? Oh,
yes, it’s extraordinary how criminals don’t escape.
If you come to think of it, we were close on the
track of our man the whole time.”</p>

<p>“There,” said Gordon, “I can’t agree with you.
Up to a certain point we were on the right track.
Then you came and confused all the tracks with
your ‘Davenant-is-Brotherhood’ slogan. After that
we were at a loss—or rather, it was worse than
that, we were definitely off the true scent, although
the man himself was within a few yards of us. It
was only because he came out of his hiding-place
and disturbed Reeves’ papers—a sheer accident,
from our point of view—that we were able to start
again. Now, your ideal detective is never dependent
upon an accident.”</p>

<p>“Well, don’t rub it in,” suggested Reeves. “After
all, we are both of us as much to blame, because we
swallowed Carmichael’s theory like lambs.”</p>

<p>“Well, as a matter of fact, I never did agree with
Carmichael.”</p>

<p>“Never did agree with him? Well, you kept
jolly dark about it. What weren’t you satisfied
with about his explanation?”</p>

<p>“Oh, it seemed to me to disregard human
probabilities. And, as I told you the other day, I trust
human probabilities more than I trust
circumstantial evidence. I didn’t believe, for example, that
the same man could be a Catholic from Saturday
to Monday and an atheist for the rest of the week.”</p>

<p>“But Carmichael explained that. Surely it’s
reasonable that a Roman Catholic should want to
sweep away what he regards as inadequate
theologies?”</p>

<p>“No, it’s just what he wouldn’t do. I used to
know a good many Catholics at one time, and I
know a certain amount about their point of view.
And they couldn’t act in the way Carmichael
described, because it would be doing evil in order
that good might come of it. And Catholic theology,
you see, doesn’t allow that.”</p>

<p>“I only gave that as a possible explanation,”
objected Carmichael. “There are plenty of other
possible explanations.”</p>

<p>“I know. But what’s the good of any number
of possible explanations when no single explanation
is probable? I never can understand the kind of
madness that imagines it has solved a difficulty when
it has found a whole number of possible explanations
that aren’t probable. What difference does
the number of them make? As a matter of fact,
in this case there’s only one—that Brotherhood
really was an atheist, but posed as a Catholic when he
was Davenant merely to put people off the scent.
But can’t you see how monstrous that is? Instead
of taking the trouble to go over to Paston bridge
every Sunday, he might have gained a far bigger
local reputation for piety by sitting under Marryatt
once in three weeks.”</p>

<p>“Well, what other human probabilities are there?”</p>

<p>“Next to changing one’s religion every Saturday
to Monday, the most impossible thing in the world
would be to change one’s game of golf every
Saturday to Monday. Theoretically it sounds all right;
in practice I don’t believe in it. I can’t think how
you did either, Carmichael, because golf is a thing
of which you <em>have</em> some experience.”</p>

<p>“Well, why didn’t you communicate these doubts
to us before?”</p>

<p>“You were talking too hard. But I can produce
my diary to show you what I did think about your
suggestion.” And Gordon disappeared, to return
after a few minutes with a formidable volume over
which he spent an unvarying twenty minutes every
evening. “Here you are. ‘Thursday—Carmichael
has had an inspiration—he thinks Davenant and
Brotherhood were the same person, a sort of
Jekyll-and-Hyde pair. He overlooks, it seems to me, the
obvious phenomena of religion and golf. But of
course it is very typical’ ”—he broke off. “I don’t
expect that part would interest you.”</p>

<p>“Go on,” said Reeves. “I shouldn’t have thought
Carmichael was typical of anything. What’s it all
about?”</p>

<p>“Well, the truth is that in this diary I don’t
merely record what’s happened; I’ve got into the
way of philosophizing over it a bit. As you know,
Reeves, I’ve got a bad habit of writing for the
papers, and I find writing down my impressions every
day often helps me to find subjects.”</p>

<p>“It would be a privilege to hear what you made
of all this,” said Carmichael dryly.</p>

<p>“ ‘But of course it is very typical,’ ” Gordon read
on, “ ‘of all these modern philosophies. They are
always for explaining something in terms of
something else, just as Carmichael wants to explain
Davenant in terms of Brotherhood. In plain English it
means mixing up two things that are entirely
different. The moderns, for example, will have it that
punishment is only another name for correction.
And once you have said that, the whole idea of
punishment drops out of sight altogether. Or they will
tell you that a concept is the same as a mental
picture, or that Truth is the same as beauty, or as
intellectual convenience, or that matter is a form of
motion. The root of error is always one of those
false identifications, saying that A is B when it isn’t.</p>

<p>“ ‘The cause of them is a rage for the simplification
of experience, the result is a paralysis of
thought. There is a sense of neatness and efficiency
about identifying Davenant with Brotherhood; it
explains such a lot—you always can explain a lot by
overlooking the facts. But the result is that poor
Reeves, who up till now at least had Davenant to
hunt for, now regards Davenant as an imaginary
being, and is reduced to hunting for an imaginary
murderer. Just so it looks very neat and efficient to
say that punishment is the same thing as correction;
it explains a puzzling idea, simplifies your thought.
But what you have done is to banish the whole idea
of punishment from your mind, and turn a real
thing into a mental figment.</p>

<p>“ ‘But this theory of Carmichael’s makes an even
prettier parable of the great and unpardonable error
which tries to make one thing out of matter and
Spirit—tells you that Spirit is a mode of matter, or
the other way round. Just as Carmichael will have
it that Davenant is a mode of Brotherhood. Like
the materialist or the idealist he is stultifying
experience for the sake of a formula. Couldn’t one
write this up, somehow? Brotherhood, representing
Matter, leaves off where Davenant, representing
Spirit, begins. Carmichael, representing the modern
mind, finds this an excellent reason for supposing
that they are really, somehow, the same thing. The
materialist sees Brotherhood everywhere, the Idealist
sees Davenant everywhere, and consequently neither
of them can solve the detective mystery of
existence. It looks as if one could work up a sort of
Oriental mythology out of it, as good as most
Oriental mythologies anyway. And the joke of it is
that Davenant’s really round the corner the whole
time.’ I say, that was a pretty good shot anyhow.
Why, Carmichael, I even seem to have anticipated
your discovery of the secret passage.”</p>

<p>“H’m,” said Carmichael; “there are some
interesting half-truths in all that.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch16">

<h2>Chapter XVI. <br/> Reeves promises to do his Best</h2>

<p>The conversation recorded in the last
chapter took place (I forgot to say) on
Saturday afternoon. It was while he was at tea
downstairs that a message was brought in to Reeves
telling him that a lady wished to see him on urgent
business. She would not give her name, but she
was waiting for him in what was called “the small
lounge”—a dreary little room, which had something
of the air of a hospital waiting-room; she would be
glad if he could come as soon as possible.
Disregarding Gordon’s suggestion that he should take
Carmichael with him as a chaperon, he made his
way to the small lounge with some feeling of
self-importance, and found himself most unexpectedly
confronted with Miss Rendall-Smith.</p>

<p>“I’m afraid you think badly of me, Mr. Reeves,”
she said, “and you’ll probably think worse of me
before I’ve finished.” (Reeves gurgled dissent.)
“The other day I turned you out of the house and
told you to your face you were a liar. And that’s a
bad introduction for me when I have to come to
you, as I come now, asking for your help.”</p>

<p>Reeves was horribly embarrassed. You can offer
whisky to a policeman to show there is no ill-feeling,
but it is more difficult to offer it to a lady. “I’m
sure I should be very glad to be of any use,” he
said. “I seem somehow to have made a bad
impression on you the other day, though I still haven’t
the least idea how. Wouldn’t it really be better if
we put all our cards on the table and treated one
another frankly?”</p>

<p>“That’s just what I want to do. And, as a sort
of guarantee of good faith, I’m going to tell you
exactly what it was that made me suspicious of you
the other day. You brought me a photograph of
myself and told me you had found it on the body
of the man who was killed. Now, I was quite
prepared to believe you; he had got, and I knew he
had got, a photograph of me. But the photograph
you showed me was not the one I gave him. It was
a portrait taken on the same occasion, at the same
sitting; but it was in a slightly different pose. So
I thought, you see, that you were setting a trap
for me. Your manner was so dreadfully
Come-now-young-woman-I-know-all-about-you, that I
really thought you were a policeman, and were trying
to bluff me in some way . . . No, I haven’t finished
yet. There was one person living round here who
had a copy of the other photograph, the same kind
as you showed me. And that was Mr. Davenant,
whom they arrested this morning as the murderer.”</p>

<p>“I see. Yes, of course you must have thought
I was trying it on. The fact is, I don’t yet know
exactly how that photograph got into my
possession, but I can give a guess now, which I couldn’t
have then.” And he described in outline the
discovery of the secret passage and the sliding panel.
“You see, if it was Davenant who was behind that
panelling all the time, it was quite possible for him
to take away the portrait we found on Brotherhood,
and to put the portrait you gave him there instead.
I can’t think why he should have wanted to do it;
but there were four of us who all thought at the
time that the photograph looked different when we
took it down from the cornice. And that’s quite
natural, if it really was a different one.”</p>

<p>“Well, all that gets us into the reason why I
called. Mr. Reeves, are you working in any sort of
co-operation with the police?”</p>

<p>“No. I helped the police by taking them to
Weighford and back in my motor, but I’m not
working for them, I’m working on my own. To tell
the truth, I haven’t very much confidence in the
intelligence of the police, or in their methods.” He
omitted, somehow, to mention that the co-operation
of civilians was contrary to police regulations.</p>

<p>“In that case I can speak freely. But I want you
to understand, please, that I tell you all this in
complete confidence so far as the police are concerned.
Now, will that be all right? I mean, I suppose you
will be called as a witness.”</p>

<p>“I suppose that they can only call me as a
witness of how I found the body on Tuesday, and how
I took the police to Weighford to-day. There is no
reason why they should expect me to have any
theories about who the murderer was. I think it will
be all right.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’ll risk it, anyhow. You see, I know that
the police, once they’ve caught a man, will always
want to convict that man, merely so as to save
themselves trouble, and save their own faces.”</p>

<p>“That’s my experience of them, certainly.”
Reeves had no experience in the matter whatsoever,
but there was no harm in agreeing.</p>

<p>“Well, I’d better tell you about myself first of
all, and how I come to be mixed up in the business.
My name isn’t, legally, Miss Rendall-Smith, although
it was my maiden name. My legal name is Mrs.
Brotherhood.”</p>

<p>“You mean that you are——”</p>

<p>“His widow. It must be a wonderful thing to
be a detective, Mr. Reeves.”</p>

<p>Reeves was thrilled with the compliment, which
a more introspective person might have suspected
of irony. He suddenly remembered that a detective
ought to have a note-book, and write down facts
in it. He had no note-book, so he said, “Excuse
me,” and fetched a sheet of the club note-paper.
On this he wrote down in pencil “Miss R.-S. = Mrs.
B.” It looked rather silly, somehow, when he had
written it.</p>

<p>“I was brought up in these parts, Mr. Reeves.
My father used to be Rector of Binver. When that
photograph was taken—those photographs were
taken, my father was still alive, and I was still
unmarried. The only person who’d ever asked me
to marry him was Mr. Davenant—I expect you
know that he belongs to these parts too.”</p>

<p>“I didn’t actually know it.” The phrase
suggested that Reeves might have inferred it, but had
not any direct information on the point. “I
suppose he didn’t live at the Hatcheries then?”</p>

<p>“No, his people had a house near here, which
has been pulled down since. His mother, of course,
was an Oatvile.”</p>

<p>“To be sure.” Reeves sucked his pencil, and
wrote down “Mr. Davenant senior m. Miss Oatvile.”
Then a light burst upon him—“Good heavens!” he
said, “then that’s why he knew about the secret
passage?”</p>

<p>“He would, of course. He’s told me that he used
often to play here when he was a boy. Then there
was a coolness between his people and the Oatviles,
I think because his people became Catholics. No
quarrel, you know, only they didn’t see so much of
each other after that. Anyhow, Mr. Davenant was
badly in love with me and wanted me to marry him.
I wouldn’t—partly because I wasn’t quite sure
whether I liked him, partly because my father was
very Low Church, and he’d have been certain to
make trouble over it. Then the Davenants left the
place, and I did too after my father died; and we
didn’t see any more of one another.”</p>

<p>“When was that?”</p>

<p>“Three or four years before the war—1910 I
suppose it must have been. I started out to work
for a living, because my father hadn’t left us very
well off. And then, quite soon, I met this man
Brotherhood. He proposed and I accepted him—you
mustn’t ask me why, Mr. Reeves. That’s a
thing even detectives can’t find out about, why
women fall in love with men. I’ll only mention that
at that time he wasn’t a bit rich. After I married
we lived in a rather horrid house in Kensington.
I never knew anything about his Stock Exchange
business much, though I always had an idea that it
wasn’t very safe, if it was even honest. He began
to make money quite soon; and then, you see, he
made the whole of it over to me. He was afraid,
of course, that he might go bankrupt, and he wanted
to have a good reserve which his creditors couldn’t
touch. I was always rather a fool about business,
or I suppose I should have minded the arrangement.
As it was, I just thought it very nice of him,
and we made arrangements to take a house in the
country. I wanted Binver, because it was one of
the few places where I’d any friends.</p>

<p>“Then, quite suddenly, I found out about him.
I don’t mean about his business; I mean about his
private life. There are lots of atheists who are
very nice people; my husband wasn’t one of them.
I somehow feel that he chucked over morals first
and religion afterwards, if you know what I mean,
not the other way about.”</p>

<p>Reeves wrote down “Brotherhood not only – God
but – morals”; then he scratched it out again. Miss
Rendall-Smith went on:</p>

<p>“I didn’t want a divorce: you see, I’d been rather
strictly brought up about those things. And of
course he didn’t want one, because of the money.
Just when I wanted help and advice, I met Mr.
Davenant again; and he was furious when I told
him about it all. He set to work to try and find
out something about my husband’s business, and he
did discover something (I don’t know what it was)
which would have ruined him if it had come out.
Then he went to my husband and put a pistol to
his head, so to speak—blackmailed him really, I
suppose. He made my husband take a solemn oath
to let me go my own way and never, without my
express consent, publish the fact that he’d married
me. Then I came down here and took the house
in Binver and thought it was going to be all right.</p>

<p>“Quite soon afterwards my husband rented a
bungalow, as you know, and came to live at Paston
Whitchurch. I think he wanted to keep a watch
over me; I think he also wanted to give me the
impression that he was behaving better. But, as
he always went away for the week-ends, I didn’t
feel much interested about that. Once or twice he
asked me to come back to him, but of course I
wouldn’t. When Mr. Davenant came back from
the war, he took a house at Paston Whitchurch too,
but he could only come there from Saturday to
Monday because of his work up in London. I think
he just wanted to be near me, and to be able to
help me if I was in trouble. And that was the
state of things up to last Tuesday. Only my
husband had foreseen his bankruptcy, and was making
desperate efforts to get me to come back to him.
The horrible thing was that I had no hold over
him—the secret which would have ruined him once had
no terrors for him then—so I’d nothing but his bare
word to depend on. And I’m afraid that wasn’t
much to go upon.</p>

<p>“I knew nothing about what happened on Tuesday
till I saw it in the papers. I still don’t know
how or why the police got the idea that it was Mr.
Davenant who murdered my husband. Of course,
if they came to know all that I’ve been telling you
now, they’d think it was a certainty. But I’ve told
you about it, because I thought it was best to let
you know everything, and then perhaps you could
help.”</p>

<p>“Of course I should be awfully glad to do
anything I could to—well, to establish the innocence
of an innocent man. Was that your idea, Miss
Rendall-Smith?”</p>

<p>“Mr. Reeves, do you believe at all in a woman’s
intuitions? Probably you don’t, because you go
in for clues and all that sort of thing. But I assure
you I’m as certain that Mr. Davenant never laid a
hand on my husband as I’m certain that you’re
sitting in that chair. I can’t explain the feeling;
I can’t analyse it; it’s like a sort of sixth sense to
me. I’ve always had these strong intuitions, and
they’ve always been right. So I’m asking you,
quite fearlessly, to work on this case as hard as
you can, and examine all the evidence you’ve got.
I’m perfectly certain that the effect of that will be
to prove Mr. Davenant’s innocence. I know he ran
away and hid himself; but after all, that’s a thing
an innocent man may easily do if he’s afraid of
being charged with murder.”</p>

<p>“I was saying the same thing to my friends only
this afternoon.”</p>

<p>“Mr. Reeves, you’re wonderful! And, of course,
you’ve got to remember this. Mr. Davenant is—he’s
still in love with me. And, you see, he must
have known that if he were charged with the
murder, my name was likely to get dragged into the
thing. So it wasn’t only for his own sake that he
tried to get away.”</p>

<p>“Well, I’ll do my best. But you can’t throw any
light on the whole thing yourself, except for what
you’ve said? You didn’t, I mean, see Brother—see
your husband or Davenant after you heard about
the bankruptcy?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I think I ought to tell you this. Mr.
Davenant heard of the bankruptcy—or the strong
probability of it—beforehand, and wrote to warn
me. So I went up to London to see Mr.
Davenant, and came back that same afternoon. He
wanted to take me back to Binver on the earlier
train, but I wouldn’t let him—I didn’t want to be
seen travelling with him. The result was that he
travelled on that fatal train with my husband, and
so drew on himself the suspicion of murder. I don’t
think I can ever forgive myself for that.”</p>

<p>“Did Davenant hint to you at all that he meant
to see Brotherhood about it?”</p>

<p>“No, never; he said there was still hope that
my husband would stick to his word like a decent
man.”</p>

<p>“There’s one other question I want to ask you, a
rather odd one. Have you any reason to think that
Davenant was carrying a golf-ball in his pocket when
he came up on Tuesday afternoon?”</p>

<p>“He might be, of course. But he would hardly
have mentioned it, would he?”</p>

<p>“No: only I had a special reason for asking.
Well, Miss Rendall-Smith, I’ll do my best, and if I
want any more information I suppose I can come
over and see you. Are you on the telephone?”</p>

<p>“Yes; it’s Binver 35. Thank you so much, Mr.
Reeves; I shall expect great things of you,” and
he showed her out, still smiling encouragement.</p>

<p>“That’s a damned fine woman,” he said to
himself as he shut the door after her.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch17">

<h2>Chapter XVII. <br/> By which Train?</h2>

<p>He met Marryatt on his way upstairs—Marryatt
looking pained, as he always did
when bad news went round.</p>

<p>“I must congratulate you on your driving, Reeves.
It’s all over the Club. But when I think of that
poor fellow Davenant—I wonder now, do you think
perhaps the jury will find Davenant was insane?
Why do we always assume it’s a madman’s act
to take one’s own life, when it’s surely a far more
desperate thing to take anybody else’s? Did you
think, from what you saw of Davenant, that he was
in mental health?”</p>

<p>“My dear Marryatt,” said Reeves, “you’re
jumping to conclusions again. The police have arrested
Davenant, because his movements since the time
of the murder have been suspicious, and he has got
to account for them. But there isn’t any positive
case against him as far as I know.”</p>

<p>“I’m afraid the facts are only too clear,” said
Marryatt, shaking his head. “A man doesn’t
conceal himself so carefully unless there’s a guilty
conscience behind it. But I still ask myself, was it a
sane man’s act?”</p>

<p>Reeves was a little disappointed to find the
assumption of Davenant’s guilt so universal. People,
he felt, were confoundedly illogical. He went to
look for Carmichael, in the hope that he might have
some new illuminating theories, but Gordon
discouraged him.</p>

<p>“Carmichael says he’s sick of the whole thing,
and he’s going back to golf. He speaks quite
vindictively of Davenant, and really, I think, wants
to see him hanged for not having been Brotherhood
after all. It’s an odd thing, human nature.”</p>

<p>“Well, look here, Gordon, I’ve been seeing Miss
Rendall-Smith, and she’s been giving me a whole
lot of information. Come and sit in my room for a
bit, and let me get it clear; then we can think the
case out all over again.”</p>

<p>Gordon was not impressed by the recital of Miss
Rendall-Smith’s disclosures. “It seems to me,” he
said, “that every word of that makes the case
against Davenant stronger instead of weaker. The
one thing we had still to look for was a motive, and
here’s a motive ready-made. Davenant had every
temptation to want Brotherhood out of the way;
it would rid the world of a worm, and leave the
course clear for him to marry the widow. I hope
she won’t go and tell all that story to the counsel
for the defence.”</p>

<p>“But what impressed me,” objected Reeves, “was
this—nobody knew more clearly than Miss
Rendall-Smith what temptation Davenant had had to
commit the murder, and yet nobody could have been
more positive about Davenant’s innocence. What I
mean is this: isn’t the strength of the <i lang="la">prima facie</i>
evidence for his guilt the strongest possible test of
her belief in Davenant’s innocence?”</p>

<p>“<i lang="la">Credo quia impossibile</i>, you mean? Well,
personally, I don’t attach very much importance to the
lady’s feelings.”</p>

<p>“I think that’s very inconsistent of you, Gordon.
Only the other day you were saying you would rather
trust the evidence of people than the evidence of
things.”</p>

<p>“But her feelings aren’t evidence. I’m willing
enough to trust in what she knows about
Davenant; but I’m not willing to trust in what she
says she thinks she has persuaded herself to think
she knows about Davenant. And that is about the
correct description, I should say, for a woman’s
intuition.”</p>

<p>“Oh, come! You must have a little more
imagination than that.”</p>

<p>“Well, look here, she says she trusts her
intuitions, and wants you to trust them. She says she
always does trust them and they never fail her.
Now, this is the woman who, with her eyes open,
went and married a dirty little sharper like
Brotherhood. If women’s intuitions were worth anything,
wouldn’t she have had an intuition which told her
she was throwing herself away on a nasty little
worm?”</p>

<p>“Well, let’s leave her intuitions alone. I want to
start out with an absolutely unbiassed mind, with
no presumption for Davenant or against him. And
I want you to help me to go through all the
evidence we collected, and see if we can’t make sense
out of it somehow. Because we haven’t done that
yet, Davenant or no Davenant.”</p>

<p>“You mean you want to do some thinking aloud,
while I sit opposite you and say ‘My dear Reeves!
How on earth . . .’ from time to time? All right;
start away.”</p>

<p>“Well, look here, what was the most incongruous
thing we found, when we examined Brotherhood’s
body?”</p>

<p>“You mean me to say the two watches. To my
mind it’s the fact of his having a ticket. Because
he surely had a season?”</p>

<p>“He did. I went and asked specially at the
booking-office. But of course he might have left
his at home by mistake.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but that won’t really do. Because on a
line like this, surely, the porters know most of the
season-ticket holders by heart? And the odds are
that if he’d said, ‘I’ve left my season at home,’ the
porter would have touched his cap and said, ‘Right
you are, sir.’ Now, knowing that possibility, that
all-but-certainty, was Brotherhood fool enough to
go and book before he left London? As far as I
remember, the tickets on this line aren’t examined
till you change or till you go out of the station.”</p>

<p>“You’re right. There’s something that looks
devilish wrong about that. Well, how did the ticket
get there, then?”</p>

<p>“It looks, surely, as if it was put there after the
man was dead.”</p>

<p>“And if it was put there, it was put there to
create a false impression, obviously. Now, let’s
see; what false impression could you create by
putting a ticket in a dead man’s pocket? That he
was travelling on a different day—of course, that’s
possible.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but that wasn’t it: I mean, it wasn’t on
Monday that he was killed. Because he was seen
going up on Tuesday morning; they said that at the
inquest.”</p>

<p>“Good, then that’s excluded. Or you might
create the impression that he was travelling third when
he was really travelling first. But that would be
useless, wouldn’t it, because lots of people on this
line travel first on a third-class ticket when the trains
are crowded, and this train was. Or you might
create the impression that he was travelling, when
he wasn’t really travelling at all. But Brotherhood
clearly was, because he came up from London all
right. The only other false impression would be
that his destination was different from what it really
was. But dash it all, his ticket was for Paston
Whitchurch, and he was killed—Oh, good Lord!”</p>

<p>“What’s the matter?”</p>

<p>“What fools we’ve been! Don’t you see that if
the man was really pitched out of the three o’clock
from London, which doesn’t stop between
Weighford and Binver, a ticket for Paston Whitchurch
would disguise the fact that he came by that train,
and make everybody think he came in the later
one—the 4.50 from Paston Oatvile?”</p>

<p>“By Gad, that sounds more promising. Then
the murderer could prove an alibi by showing that
he travelled on the three o’clock, eh?”</p>

<p>“That would be about the size of it. Let’s see,
had we any other reason for assuming the 4.50
train?”</p>

<p>“The watch—the wrist-watch, that is. It had
stopped at 4.54.”</p>

<p>“You mean that it stopped at a moment when
its hands were pointing to 4.54. But obviously
it would be the simplest thing in the world to fake
a watch. And—I say, Gordon, we can prove it!”</p>

<p>“Prove it?”</p>

<p>“Yes, from the other watch, the stomach-watch.
Don’t you remember it was still going when we
found it, only an hour fast? Well, the reason why
it was an hour fast was that the murderer, at 3.54
on Tuesday afternoon, deliberately took it out of the
pocket and turned it on to 4.54.”</p>

<p>“You mean . . .”</p>

<p>“I mean that the murderer naturally assumed it
would stop, like the wrist-watch. And if it had
stopped, it would have registered 4.54, like the
wrist-watch. But by the accident of its not
stopping, we can prove what the murderer did!”</p>

<p>“I say, this is a day! but I feel as if there was
something else we were held up over about the
time—oh yes. Look here, we’ve now got to explain why
Brotherhood ordered himself a sleeper for
Wednesday, although one would have expected him to want
to clear out on Tuesday. Our explanation, you see,
was that coming to Paston Whitchurch on the 4.50
would make it too late for him to get a sleeper that
night. But apparently we were wrong, because he
came on the three o’clock from London; and I
remember, when I looked it up in the time-table, I
found he could have caught his train at
Crewe—going on from Binver, of course.”</p>

<p>“Yes, that’s true. Still, it’s only a subsidiary
point. Let’s see . . . the sleeper had originally
been dated for the Thursday, hadn’t it; and then
Thursday had been scratched out and Wednesday
put instead?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but it was no good supposing <em>that</em> was a
fraud. Because Thursday wouldn’t be any more
probable than Wednesday,—in fact, less.”</p>

<p>“Yes; it’s confoundedly queer. I suppose he
couldn’t possibly—Gordon, what date was the
Wednesday?”</p>

<p>“The 17th.”</p>

<p>“It was? Then the Tuesday would be the 16th,
and the Thursday the 18th.”</p>

<p>“My dear Reeves! How on earth . . .”</p>

<p>“Child’s play, my dear Gordon. No, but look
here, it’s serious. Don’t you see that if there’s one
day of the week whose name can be easily changed
to another it’s Tuesday, which you can always
change to Thursday? And that if there’s one
number which can be easily changed it’s 6, which you can
always change to 8?”</p>

<p>“Yes, but this wasn’t a change of . . .”</p>

<p>“Oh, don’t you see? The sleeper was for
Tuesday the 16th, the day of the murder. Brotherhood
meant to go straight from Binver. The murderer
found this sleeper-coupon in his pocket, and saw
a golden opportunity of clinching his faked evidence
about the trains. He could have destroyed the
document, of course,—it was dangerous to him,
because it proved that Brotherhood was really on the
fast train. But he could do better by faking that
too; changing Tuesday into Thursday and 16 into
18. Look here, how easy it is to do . . . There!
Very little risk of detection there. But there was
just a slight risk of detection, and this man wasn’t
taking any risks, So, having changed Tuesday the
16th into Thursday the 18th, he deliberately crossed
out Thursday the 18th, and wrote in ‘Wednesday’
the ‘17th.’ Double bluff, that is. People don’t
look for two corrections where they can see that
there’s one.”</p>

<p>“I say, this murderer is some fellow!”</p>

<p>“Some fellow, but that fellow’s name isn’t
Davenant. Don’t you see, we’ve got the porter’s word
for it that Davenant came up from London by the
later train, the 3.47. And Miss Rendall-Smith can
also witness that he took the later train. So that,
long before Davenant had got as far as Paston
Oatvile—actually, when he was only seven minutes out
of London—Brotherhood was falling down that
embankment. And where’s your conviction now?”</p>

<p>“Quite true—if we’re right. But it is only
circumstantial evidence, isn’t it? We’ve proved our
own case more plausible than the case against
Davenant, but we haven’t shown that the case against
Davenant is impossible. However, if we’re right,
one thing is pretty clear—that the murder was a
deliberate one, deeply and carefully planned. And
we’ve got to find somebody who had the motive and
the opportunity to carry out this very elaborate
scheme.”</p>

<p>“I know. The police will never look at our
objections until they lead us to find the real man. The
police always want to have a victim.”</p>

<p>“And we can’t show, can we, that it was
impossible for Davenant to throw a man out of the 4.50
train?”</p>

<p>“We can show it’s improbable. Remember how
crowded the 4.50 always is, how crowded it was
on the day when you and I travelled by it. The
three o’clock train from London, of course, wouldn’t
be a bit crowded; people haven’t started getting
away from business by then—it’s only for ladies who
have been up to shop. One could secure privacy
even in a third-class carriage on that train.”</p>

<p>“But it’s only circumstantial evidence still.”</p>

<p>“There are two other things we want to get to
work on; the washing-list, as we called it, though
I’m pretty certain it’s nothing of the kind, which
we found on the back of the cipher, and the
golf-ball which we found beside the line.”</p>

<p>“We want a theory, too, about the cipher. I
wonder if Davenant admits that he wrote that
cipher? You see, it will be apt to tell against him.
He knew that Brotherhood had made a promise,
and was threatening to break it. So that the police
will attach importance to a document which tells
him that he will perish if he goes back upon his
faith.”</p>

<p>“Yes, if they find out about it. But do you
suppose the police have read that cipher? I very much
doubt it.”</p>

<p>“Aren’t you going to tell them about it?”</p>

<p>“I don’t think so. I know what you’ll say, you’ll
say that one should always tell the truth. But it
isn’t an easy thing, telling the truth. I know what
the truth is—namely that Davenant is innocent. I
know, therefore, that this post card was a
side-issue, irrelevant to the true explanation. If I show
the police the meaning of the cipher, it will fortify
them in what I know to be a false impression.
Therefore, aren’t I serving the best interests of
truth if I sit on the cipher and say nothing about it?”</p>

<p>“I wonder,” said Gordon.</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch18">

<h2>Chapter XVIII. <br/> The Holmes Method</h2>

<p>When they met at breakfast next morning,
Gordon was in a chastened mood.</p>

<p>“I was thinking over our ideas last
night in bed, and I see that it’s all a wash-out. The
thing doesn’t work.”</p>

<p>“Doesn’t work?”</p>

<p>“No, there are two snags which seem to me
hopeless. Look here, if Brotherhood was chucked off
the 4.50 from Paston Oatvile, one can understand
why Davenant should have got the wind up. He
may have seen the thing happen; or he may have
seen Brotherhood get in at Oatvile and found he
wasn’t in the train when it got to Whitchurch—that
might make him think there was something
wrong, even if he’d really nothing to do with it.
But if Davenant came back on the 4.50, and
Brotherhood had been chucked off the earlier train, how
did Davenant know anything about it? He would
hear nothing, till he heard that we had found a
dead body on the lines, and even then we weren’t
certain till next day whose body it was. Why did
Davenant disappear, in that case, and hide in a
very uncomfortable passage?”</p>

<p>“I thought of that. But you forget, Davenant
was just coming back from an interview with Miss
Rendall-Smith. He had probably seen her off on
the three o’clock, and seen Brotherhood get into
it. He comes down to the Hatcheries with the
definite idea of remonstrating with Brotherhood; his
first act, therefore, is to call at Brotherhood’s house,
and ask for him. He gathers, in the course of Mrs.
Bramston’s opening address, that Brotherhood has
never turned up at all. Clearly, then, Brotherhood
has either committed suicide or (more probably)
vanished. In either case he has disappeared, and
Davenant is afraid that he himself or (worse) Miss
Rendall-Smith may be involved in the inquiry. It
may be all right, of course, but there is danger. So
he hits upon a very ingenious plan—going back to
the secret passage in which he played as a child,
and overhearing, as one does overhear in the Club,
all the local gossip. Safe from observation, he can
form his conclusions and mature his plans. He
lies low until the moment at which he realizes that
Miss Rendall-Smith is involved in the inquiry; and
then by two incautious actions he gives himself
away.”</p>

<p>“Well, I suppose all that’s possible. But here’s
the other snag, which is even worse: that copy
of Momerie’s <i>Immortality</i>, with the marks at the
side which clearly betrayed Brotherhood’s
ownership, was found at Paston Oatvile in the 3.47 from
London. Now, how did Brotherhood manage to
leave his book in the 3.47 if he didn’t travel in it?”</p>

<p>“That’s true. But mightn’t it be a blind?
Remember, we’re dealing with an extraordinarily clever
criminal. He faked the ticket; he faked the
watches; he faked the sleeper-coupon: mayn’t he
have managed to fake Brotherhood’s train-literature
as well?”</p>

<p>“We’re dealing with a clever man, but not with
one who’s clever enough to come up here by the
three o’clock, simultaneously leaving a book lying
about in the 3.47.”</p>

<p>“No, that’s true; it does seem difficult. But
there must be some explanation, mustn’t there?
Wait a minute . . . I know! When Carmichael
got that book from the porter, the porter said he
had taken it <em>off that train</em>. But a porter, when he
says ‘off the 3.47’ doesn’t necessarily mean ‘off
the 3.47 on Tuesday’—the day you are asking
about. The 3.47 is to him a single entity which
renews itself from day to day. He took that book
off the train on Monday, depend upon it.
Brotherhood left Momerie in the train when he came down
on the Monday afternoon; consequently,
Brotherhood probably never read the cipher that would have
warned him of his danger. It wasn’t till Friday that
Carmichael made inquiries about the book, and of
course by that time the porter wouldn’t be able to
remember, even if he tried, which <em>day</em> it was that
the book was found.”</p>

<p>“There’s sense in that. I don’t like it, though,
I’m hanged if I do.”</p>

<p>The hour after breakfast on Sunday was an hour
of suspended animation in Paston Oatvile
dormy-house. Very few of the members ever went to
church, and fewer than ever this week, when several
of them had “kept a roller” (in Oxford parlance)
by attending Brotherhood’s funeral. On the other
hand, it was not considered good form to start on
the morning round until the padre had set out for
the half-past nine service. Until that moment you
smoked, read the Sunday papers, and in general tried
to cultivate the air of a man in two minds as to
whether he should go to church or no. The weather
prospects were anxiously forecast; the political
situation was greeted with apoplectic comments from
the older members, and the Club acrostician went to
and fro eliciting items of expert knowledge from
anybody who was available. The atmosphere was
one of Sabbath peace, yet the kind of peace that can
only be secured by preparing for golf. Gordon
had decided to take a rest from detection, and was
intending to go round with Carmichael: Mordaunt
Reeves was determined not to touch a club until
the Links Mystery should be solved.</p>

<p>“If it comes to that,” said Reeves, as they went
upstairs, “have you considered this side of the
question? A book cipher is ordinarily prearranged
between the two parties. Now, in this one it is very
unlikely that it was prearranged, for the message
looks as if it came from an enemy. Therefore the
message could only be sent by some one who knew
that Brotherhood was reading Momerie’s <i>Immortality</i>
at the moment—knew, in fact, that the book
was close to his hand. Well, how could Davenant
know all that? He had not seen Brotherhood, he
had not travelled with him—how was he to know
that his thoughts would instinctively turn towards
that particular book? For Davenant, it’s
impossible. What we want to find is somebody who knew
that Brotherhood would have access to that
particular book at that particular moment.”</p>

<p>“Let’s have another look at the book, anyway.
Carmichael said that it was obviously Brotherhood’s
copy, because of the queries and things in the
margin, but we haven’t even verified that yet.”</p>

<p>They were met by an almost uncanny repetition
of Reeves’ experience two days before. He had
put the paper-bound volume—he was positive that
he had put it—in a particular place on his shelves.
It was not there, and no amount of search in his
rooms could discover it. In despair they sent for
Carmichael, to know if for any reason of his own
he had resumed possession of what, after all, was
his book. He knew nothing of the disappearance;
and was inclined to suspect deliberate theft. “You
see,” he said, “we never proved that it was
Davenant who took away that cipher. We suspected
him, of course, when we found that he had been
hiding in the secret passage; the exchange of
photographs can only be put down to him. But it’s
perfectly possible that the cipher was taken away by
somebody who simply walked in at the door—somebody
who is still in a position to walk in at
the door and steal your books, Reeves.”</p>

<p>“And that somebody isn’t Davenant. Davenant,
poor fellow, is under lock and key.”</p>

<p>“It’s a rum thing about that cipher,” said
Gordon. “When we’ve got it it doesn’t seem to help
us in the least, but whenever we want to get at it,
it always seems that the important document has
disappeared.”</p>

<p>“It’s getting on my nerves,” admitted Reeves.
“Seems to me I can’t leave my room without
something queer turning up.”</p>

<p>“Look here, Carmichael,” said Gordon, “this is
where you come in. Get out your stethoscope and
go down on all-fours and find clues for us.”</p>

<p>“I am afraid that a person entering a room and
taking a book away does not commonly leave very
much mark on the surroundings. Let’s take a look
round, by all means—it’s Sunday, after all, and the
housemaid won’t have been dusting. Maids, you
will notice, always polish the grates on Sunday but
do not dust the rooms; why, I cannot say.
Whereabouts did you put the book, Reeves?”</p>

<p>“On that shelf there, the top but one.”</p>

<p>“It was natural for you to put it there, because
it’s within your reach. But you’re tall—I wonder
if the other gentleman was shorter? I think a
chair would be useful here. . . . Thank you. Yes,
he was a good deal shorter. He had to stand on
tip-toe to reach the book, and balanced himself, as
we all do in such circumstances, by resting the four
finger-tips of his left hand on the edge of the shelf
beneath. In that way, you see, he could get the
forefinger of his right hand on the top of the book.
I should say he was a man of about Gordon’s
height.”</p>

<p>“Unmasked!” cried Gordon, recoiling
dramatically. “Send for the Black Maria; I’ll go quiet.”</p>

<p>“I was about to observe, my dear Gordon, that
I attach no suspicion to you, because you have
unusually long arms for your height. But this
man, on the usual calculations, would be about
your height, or a little smaller. Now, I wonder if
he poked about in the other shelves at all? Most
people, when they are looking for a book, take out
one or two of the other books in mere inadvertent
curiosity. Extraordinary the fascination that books
have. I am told that Whitewell, at Oxford, loses
twenty pounds’ worth of books a year by theft, as
the result of letting people prowl round his shop at
their pleasure. Ah! Reeves, your room is an
excellent subject for the detective.”</p>

<p>“Why mine, particularly?”</p>

<p>“Because you are a man of such tidy habits.”</p>

<p>“Tidy!” protested Gordon. “Look at those
letters on the table.”</p>

<p>“Pernickety would perhaps have been the just
word. You are the sort of man who cannot leave
a thing lying on the floor, he must pick it up.
Consequently, you are the kind of man who always
keeps his books on a dead level: some people do,
some don’t. Now, if this Shakespeare had been
protruding like that yesterday, you would have
noticed it and pushed it in.”</p>

<p>“I suppose I should.”</p>

<p>“Your visitor has not the same type of mind.
He pushed in the two volumes on each side when
he took it out, and then he put it back without
driving it home, so to speak. Now, let’s see if we
can find which part he was reading. Ordinarily,
as you doubtless know, if you open a book at
random it will open at the page where it was last
shut—that is, if it has been held open some little
time . . . If that principle applies here, our unknown
friend has been reading <i>Hamlet</i>—‘To be or not to
be’ comes on this page.”</p>

<p>“A rather banal taste,” suggested Gordon. “You
can’t get much out of that.”</p>

<p>“It suggests at least that he was a seriously
minded person, and not all our fellow-residents are
that. By the way, I suppose there is no chance
that the secret passage is still being used?”</p>

<p>“Hardly. You see, it made me nervous, so I
put that settee in front of it.”</p>

<p>“One could push that out,” suggested Gordon.</p>

<p>“But not put it back in position again once
you were inside the passage. No, I think it must
be a member of the club (just possibly a servant)
we are looking for, who stands about five foot four
and has sombre tastes in literature. Has he left
any other traces? The fireplace is the only hope.
Ah! He seems to me to treat you rather familiarly,
Reeves—he has borrowed a pipe-cleaner and used
it.” And Carmichael, stooping, picked one out of
the fireplace. “Did you have a fire yesterday?”</p>

<p>“No, life was too hurried. But I had one the
day before.”</p>

<p>“Then your grate was cleaned yesterday morning,
not this morning. This pipe-cleaner is very dirty,
which shows that your visitor did not, like yourself,
wrap up his tobacco in those irritating little circles
of paper which destroy all the taste. Gordon, you
use them too, don’t you? This was a stranger, then,
though not necessarily the same who took the book.
I think he came here yesterday, not this morning.”</p>

<p>“Why?”</p>

<p>“Because the first pipe of the day is seldom foul;
it has dried in the night. This was thoroughly foul.
Of course, if the person who used this pipe-cleaner
was the person who took the book, it’s obvious he
did not come in with any felonious intentions, or he
would hardly have made himself so much at home.”</p>

<p>“But that might have been a sudden idea.”</p>

<p>“Of course. But I should be careful how you
accuse people of theft merely because their pipes
are newly cleaned. Let us just see if he emptied
out his pipe first; if it was a plain tobacco, it will
have left a dottle. . . . Yes, here it is—as I feared,
the inevitable Worker’s Army Cut; half the Club
smokes that. No, I’m afraid we can’t put the
handcuffs on anybody just yet. But, of course, you
might find an excuse for going round your friends’
rooms and looking for the lost book.”</p>

<p>“During evening church,” suggested Gordon,
cynically, it is to be feared, for the function did
not noticeably attract the Club members.</p>

<p>“Well, it all wants thinking out. You and
Gordon had better go and play your round, while I see
if I can make anything of it.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch19">

<h2>Chapter XIX. <br/> Mordaunt Reeves talks to Himself</h2>

<p>For some time after they had left, Mordaunt
Reeves sat in his arm-chair hunting that
most difficult of quarries, an intellectual
inspiration. Merely artistic inspiration greets us
when it wills, at the sight of a flower or of two lovers
in a lane—we cannot chase it or make it come to
our call. A merely intellectual problem can be
solved by will-power, by sitting down to it with a
wet towel round your head. But there are
moments in an intellectual inquiry when inspiration can
only come to us from dogged envisaging of the facts.
Such was the point at which Reeves found
himself; his clues were sufficient to exonerate, in his own
mind at least, the arrested Davenant; they were
not yet positive enough to mark out any victim
who could be substituted. “A golf-ball,” he kept
saying to himself, “a golf-ball by the side of the
railway line, a few yards behind the spot from which
the murdered man fell. It must have something to
do with it, but where, where does it fit in?” At
last, weary of cudgelling his brains over the
unlighted grate, he seized his cap and strode out into
the air. Half of set purpose, half under the
fascination of his thoughts, he found himself climbing
once more the steep path that led up the railway
embankment and on to the forbidden precincts of
the line.</p>

<p>St. Luke’s summer still held; the comparative
silence of man’s Sabbath conspired with the autumn
stillness of nature—the sunshine quiet that is
disturbed no longer by clicking grasshoppers, nor yet
by cawing rooks—to hush the countryside. Far
below him he could see the golfers at their orisons,
fulfilling, between hope and fear, the daily cycle of
their existence. Gordon and Carmichael were at
the third tee now; he could have waved to them.
Carmichael always made too much business about
addressing the ball. Over there was the neglected
house, itself radiating the silence of a forgotten past.
All else was drowsing; he alone, Mordaunt Reeves,
strode on relentlessly in pursuit of crime.</p>

<p>He threw himself down at full length on the bank,
just beneath the line. “Now,” he said, talking to
himself out loud, “you are in the fast train from
London to Binver, Mordaunt Reeves. It has
stopped only once at a station, Weighford;
probably oftener outside stations, because it is a foggy
day and the trains get through slowly, with little
fog-signals going off at intervals. If you fired a
pistol at a fellow-passenger, it would probably be
mistaken for a fog-signal by the people in the next
carriage. Is that worth thinking of, I wonder?
No, there must have been traces of a wound if a
wound had been made, and it would have come out
at the inquest. So you can’t get much further that
way, my dear.</p>

<p>“There is somebody in the train you badly want
to murder. You want to murder him to-day,
because his bankruptcy has just been declared, and
if he is found dead people will think it is suicide.
You have warned him to look out for himself—I
wonder why you did that? But of course you must
have done it on Monday so as to give him a chance
to save himself. . . . No, that won’t do, because you
didn’t know anything about his bankruptcy before
Tuesday. . . . But the message reached him on
Tuesday morning. That is to say, you have a
motive for killing him which is probably quite
unconnected with his bankruptcy, which is not known
about at present—certainly kind Mr. Davenant does
not know about it. He is not coming by this train,
he is waiting till the 3.47. You sent this man a
message on Monday, containing a cipher which depended
on a book which was in his possession, which you
knew was in his possession—did you, perhaps, give
him that book? It will be a nuisance to you later
on, when it is found, and you will want to steal it.</p>

<p>“Meanwhile, the train is steaming on, and you
must do something; you must get on with the
murder. Is he in the same carriage, or in a different
one? And if it’s a different one, is there a corridor
between? Let’s see, there’s a corridor on the three
o’clock train, but it doesn’t connect with the slip
that comes off at Binver. Probably you are in the
Binver slip, because the railway people always try
to shove one into that. I am sure you were in the
slip, not in the corridor part of the train, because
later on you are going to execute certain
complicated manœuvres over a dead man’s body, and it
would be dangerous to do that if a man might look
in and say ‘Tickets please’ at any moment. No,
you must be in the slip, and unless you are in the
same carriage, there is no connection between you
and him except along the footboard. That is rather
hard to climb along while the train is going; but
of course in the fog it may not be going just at this
moment. It may be being held up by those signals
that are connected with the Paston Whitchurch
goods siding, those you see over there—at least, no,
you do not see them because of the fog.</p>

<p>“But are you in the same carriage? You might
have the decency to tell me that. Preferably not,
because people saw you getting in, and people might
remember afterwards that you got into the same
carriage with him. Besides, you are choosing for
the murder a part of the line where it curves, and
curves away from the side where you are going to
throw the man out. Why did you choose that
particular part, unless you wanted to do something in
the way of climbing along the footboard? I think
you are in a different carriage. And you’ve got to
murder somebody who is next door. Now, it’s no
good telling me that you’re going to climb along
the footboard and attack him, because he would
certainly ring the communication cord if you did.</p>

<p>“He is alone in his first-class carriage, and you
are alone in yours. Possibly he is asleep, but if so
you’ve no means of knowing. You might, of course,
bore a hole between the two carriages—and then?
Put a cobra through, like the Speckled Band, to
make him jump out of the train, or to kill him as
he sits there? Not very probable, I think; cobras
are so difficult to buy, as you rightly observe,
without attracting suspicion. Or could you let loose
some poisonous gas through the hole? That is a
really bright idea; I give you 90 per cent. for it,
only I hardly think a very practicable solution, my
dear Reeves, if you don’t mind my saying so. You
would look such a fool getting into the train with a
couple of oxygen cylinders, or a large balloon. No,
you can’t do anything with holes in the partition.
To do anything, you must be leaning out of the
window. If anything is to be done, you must both be
leaning out of the window.</p>

<p>“Of course people do lean out of the window
when the train stops and there isn’t a station there.
But you can’t be certain that your man will look
out: and people generally look out in the direction
in which the train is curving: they can see more that
way. And you could only make him look
out—steady on! Keep steady, Reeves! Oh yes, you
could certainly do that: thank you very much
indeed; the whole thing becomes a good deal clearer.
And then you hit him a good smack on the head,
that stuns him anyhow, with a stick. That must
have made you rather noticeable, because people
don’t take sticks up to London much—strong sticks,
I mean. It would have to be—well, I’m blessed!”</p>

<p>And in another moment Reeves was scrambling
down the bank, precipitous as it was, to a clump of
rank grass some ten feet below. Half-hidden in
this he had seen, and now painfully secured, a
large knotted stick such as may be carried by a
peaceable man, but undoubtedly would come in
useful in a scrap. It might be coincidence of course,
but that seemed too good to be true. And yet,
was it not also too good to be true that he, nearly
a week after the event, should be holding between
his hands the very weapon, undiscovered hitherto,
which had begun the assault? There was no name
on it. There was no blood on it, nor any mark of
violence. And yet it could undoubtedly have given
a stunning blow without breaking or showing signs
of the contact.</p>

<p>The next point was to get his treasure home, and
this was not so easy as it sounds. He did not dare
to carry it openly with him to the dormy-house;
if the murderer really lived there he might easily
catch sight of the stick and take the alarm. To
carry a stick up your trousers-leg makes you a
marked man at once. He left it concealed in the
bushes a little way from the dormy-house, and went
to fetch his golf-bag, in which he bestowed it upside
down, and so smuggled it unobserved to his room.</p>

<p>Gordon and Carmichael were properly thrilled by
the discovery, but were not very helpful in making
suggestions for its use. Carmichael said that he
might take the stick to Brotherhood’s grave and
see if it bled there, but added that this test was
no longer used, he believed, in the detective world.
On the whole, it seemed best to hide it away, taking
no risks with stray visitors, and keep it until
suspicion was thrown on some definite person—then it
might come in handy. Meanwhile, Reeves thought
he had now sufficient grounds for optimism about
his case to justify him in a Sunday afternoon call on
Miss Rendall-Smith. This time, Gordon refused
to accompany him, and he went over in his own car,
though he was careful to garage it at the hotel, for
fear the sight of it might have painful memories
for his hostess. There was no mistaking the eagerness
and anxiety of the tone in which she asked for
news. Reeves, with an indiscretion which he would
have been the first to criticize a week ago, told
her all his suspicions and all his hopes.</p>

<p>“You’re a genius, Mr. Reeves,” she said when he
had finished.</p>

<p>“I’m afraid it’s Carmichael that does all the clever
work,” he admitted. “Only it’s so difficult to get
him to keep up his interest in any subject, he always
branches off to something else.”</p>

<p>“It’s most exasperating to think that I must
actually have been on the same train with my husband,
and not noticed anything,” said Miss Rendall-Smith.
“Now, let’s see, which part of the train did I come
on? Oh, it was the corridor part, I know, because
I remember finding I had got into a smoker, and
changing my carriage while the train was going. I
was rather early for the train, so of course I
shouldn’t have seen anybody getting into the Binver
slip behind.”</p>

<p>“Did Davenant by any chance see you off?”</p>

<p>“Yes, he did.”</p>

<p>“What sort of journey did you have?”</p>

<p>“Oh, we crawled. You know what this line is
when there’s a fog on. I never can see why there
should be any danger, but we stopped at nearly all
the signals. And now you mention it, I remember
we did stop just at that curve of the line, a little
way before Paston Whitchurch.”</p>

<p>“You didn’t see anybody you knew getting out
of the train at Binver?”</p>

<p>“No, I didn’t notice anybody. But then, I had
to go to the Parcels Office about something, so I
didn’t go out with the crowd. Oh, it’s maddening
to think I’ve been so little use.”</p>

<p>“Never mind, I dare say it might have put us off
on a false scent if you had seen anybody.”</p>

<p>“Mr. Reeves, I think I ought to tell you one
other thing, though I dare say you will think it is
just my fancy. I have a sort of feeling that I am
being watched.”</p>

<p>“Being watched?”</p>

<p>“Yes. When I took the train to come over to
you yesterday, it was rather empty, as these
Saturday trains are, and I noticed one of my
fellow-passengers, a man who was quite a stranger to me.
The curious thing was that he came back from
Oatvile by the same train too, and I’m nearly certain,
although this may have been just fancy, that I
saw the same man watching me from the other side
of the street when I went out this morning to go to
church.”</p>

<p>“This is rather serious. Do you know of
anybody who had a grudge against you as well as
against your husband?”</p>

<p>“Honestly, I can’t think of anybody; you see,
our lives have lain so far apart lately. No, I think
it’s probably just a coincidence; I was only going
to suggest that, if I saw this man again, perhaps
I might telephone to you?”</p>

<p>“Please do. Just send me word that you’ve seen
him again and I’ll come over straight in my car.
Then perhaps we shall be able to have a better look
at him.”</p>

<p>Reeves drove away very thoughtful. Was it
possible that the same enemy who had murdered her
husband was on the widow’s track too? Or was
she psychic, and did echoes of the dead man’s
personality follow her? Certainly one might have
expected Brotherhood to rest unquietly in his grave.
His grave—would some fresh inspiration come to
Reeves, perhaps, if he paid a visit to the grave in
Paston Oatvile churchyard? He was half ashamed
of the thought, and yet . . . it could do no harm.
The evening was a fine one; there was no need to
be back early at the dormy-house. Instead of
taking the London road, which was the shortest way
home, he struck out along the winding country lane
that connected the two Pastons. In a few minutes
he had drawn up at the lych-gate, and was finding
his way among the grave-stones.</p>

<p>The sudden gasp of a harmonium surprised him—of
course, they were at evening service. What
was that tune? “Nearer, my God, to Thee,” wasn’t
it? He went up to the porch; it is an almost
irresistible temptation to listen when sound comes out
from a building into the open. . . . Yes, that was
the hymn, most rustically sung by a congregation
that sounded chiefly female, but with the one
inevitable male voice dominating all, very loud and
tuneless. Here in the porch you got a sort of
quintessential effect of Sunday evening service in a
country church: the smell of oil lamps, a glimpse
of ugly deal pews, Sunday clothes, tablets on the
wall in memory of dead virtues and hypocrisies.
Yes, it was finishing now:</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">So with my waking thoughts</p>
<p class="i2">Bright with Thy praise,</p>
<p class="i1">Out of my stony griefs</p>
<p class="i2">Beth-hel I’ll rai-haise.</p>
<p class="i1">So by my woes to be</p>
<p class="i1">Nearer, my God, to Thee,</p>
<p class="i2">Nea-rer-er to Thee——</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p class="noindent">and then the penetrating Amen for which the best
efforts of the singers seemed to have been reserved.
There was a rustle and a shuffling as the erect forms
became sedentary, and then, with sudden clearness,
Marryatt’s voice giving out the text.</p>

<p>There was no doubt what Marryatt was at—it
seemed a very embarrassing theme he had chosen.
He was working up his congregation to derive a
lesson from the tragic suddenness of Brotherhood’s
end; in the midst of life, he reminded his hearers,
they were in death; thence he would proceed to
refute Brotherhood’s own arguments of less than a
fortnight ago as to the survival of human personality.
It was a thoughtful sermon, but on sufficiently
obvious lines. “We see around us a great deal of
carelessness, a great deal of indifference, a great deal
of positive unbelief, and we ask ourselves, do we
not? whether after all the lessons we learned at
our mother’s knee were not just old wives’ fables,
good for us when we were children, but something
that manhood would outgrow. We ask ourselves,
do we not? whether after all the story of our life
will be continued elsewhere, whether after all there
is a crown to be gained. And we persuade ourselves,
perhaps, or think we have persuaded ourselves, that
there is nothing beyond, nothing eternal that we can
strive for. Death will be a quiet sleep, to just and
to unjust alike, nothing but a sleep. And then the
old questioning comes back to us:</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">To sleep—perchance to dream; aye, there’s the rub!</p>
<p class="i1">For, in that sleep of death, what dreams may come</p>
<p class="i1">When we have shuffled off this mortal coil</p>
<p class="i1">Must give us pause</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>And so we see that our difficulties are not so easily
disposed of; that it is not so easy for us, after all,
to get the better of our alarms. . . .”</p>

<p>But Mordaunt Reeves heard no more of the
sermon. He was back in his car, on the road to the
dormy-house, and as he drove he talked to himself
once more: “ ‘To be or not to be’—well, I’m
damned!”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch20">

<h2>Chapter XX. <br/> Proof at Last</h2>

<p>Reeves went to sit in Gordon’s room when
he got back; his own was apt to be a port
of call for stray comers, and he wanted this
to be a <i lang="fr">tête-à-tête</i>.</p>

<p>“I wish to God,” he started, “that I’d never been
dragged into this beastly thing at all.”</p>

<p>“Getting a brain-storm over it? Much better
take to golf again; there’s no sense in worrying over
a problem that won’t be solved.”</p>

<p>“I have solved it.”</p>

<p>“What!”</p>

<p>“I have solved it, and I wish to God I hadn’t.
Look here, Gordon, I know who it was who came
into my rooms and took out my Shakespeare. It
was Marryatt.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but you don’t mean——”</p>

<p>“It was Marryatt who took out my Shakespeare;
he wanted to look up a quotation for his evening
sermon. I know what you’ll say—it was somebody
else who took the Momerie. But it wasn’t; I’ve
been into Marryatt’s room, and I found it there.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord! Lying about?”</p>

<p>“It was on his table, but entirely covered with
papers—I thought, purposely. I didn’t like doing
it, but I felt the obvious thing was to look through
those papers on Marryatt’s table. Among them was
a postcard from Brotherhood, dated a week ago,
thanking him for the gift of a copy of
Momerie’s <i>Immortality</i>.”</p>

<p>“But, look here, the thing’s impossible!
Marryatt, I mean, Marryatt isn’t the least the sort of
person——”</p>

<p>“Yes, I know all that. I’ve thought of all that.
But just look at the facts. There’s not the least
doubt it was Marryatt who came into my room,
yesterday afternoon, I suppose. He came in, no
doubt, for the pipe-cleaner or for the Shakespeare
quotation—I don’t grudge him either. Then he
must have seen the Momerie on the shelf, and I
suppose couldn’t help taking it; he didn’t feel safe
as long as the thing was in my hands. He is, of
course, just the height Carmichael mentioned; he
does smoke Worker’s Army Cut; his pipes always
are foul.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but he may have wanted the Momerie for
anything.”</p>

<p>“Why did he never tell me he’d taken it? Look
here, you’ve got to face the facts. Let me marshal
them for you; you can imagine I’ve been thinking
them out pretty furiously. First, Marryatt had
a reason for disliking Brotherhood.”</p>

<p>“For disliking him, yes; but not for wanting to
murder him.”</p>

<p>“Of course to you and me it wouldn’t seem so;
we don’t know the clerical temper from the inside.
After all, Marryatt has a hard time of it in any case,
trying to knock a little piety out of these villagers.
What must he think of the man who comes and tries
to take away what beliefs they’ve got?”</p>

<p>“All right, go on. Of course, it’s quite
impossible.”</p>

<p>“Next point: it was Marryatt who gave
Brotherhood that Momerie book. Brotherhood, of course,
took it up to London with him in the train on
Monday, but is it likely that anybody would notice
it particularly? The one man who knew for certain
that it was in his possession was the man who had
given it to him.”</p>

<p>“But did Marryatt know anything about
Brotherhood’s connection with Miss Rendall-Smith—about
his promise to her?”</p>

<p>“We’ll come to that presently. It doesn’t arise
yet, if you consider the actual wording of the
cipher-message. What it said was, ‘You will perish if
you go back upon your <em>faith</em>’—I now read that as
a purely theological message, and I know of only
one man in the neighbourhood who would have been
likely to send such a message.”</p>

<p>“You seem to be pressing words rather far.”</p>

<p>“Next point: Marryatt did travel by the three
o’clock train on Tuesday. He made no secret of
the fact; he told us about it—why? Precisely
because he had arranged the murder so as to look as if
it was connected with the 3.47: the three o’clock
train was his alibi, and he was determined to get his
alibi well rubbed in. Don’t you remember, just
before we found the body, the discussion we all had in
the smoking-room about crime, and how Marryatt
said it was very important for the criminal to
behave naturally in company, so as to establish his
alibi? Well, that’s what he was doing at the
moment.”</p>

<p>“I’d forgotten his saying that.”</p>

<p>“It doesn’t do to forget these things. You’ve
probably forgotten that it was Marryatt who started
the whole subject, by saying it was the kind of
afternoon when one would want to murder
somebody. You see, he couldn’t get the subject out of
his mind, and he thought the easiest way to get
it off his chest was to start talking about murder,
quite naturally, in an abstract sort of way.”</p>

<p>“You’re making him out a pretty cool customer.”</p>

<p>“He was, up to a point. Remember, he started
out on a round, knowing that the body of his victim
lay under the railway arch. Only at the third tee
his nerve deserted him, and he pulled his drive.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but hang it all, anybody——”</p>

<p>“I’m only mentioning the fact; I don’t say there
was necessarily anything significant about it.
Anyhow, I sliced mine, and so we came to find
Brotherhood’s body. And that was too much for
him; you will remember that at the moment he
was quite unnerved. We had to send him off to
fetch Beazly—and he wasn’t half glad to go. After
that, remember, right up to the time of the inquest,
he was in a state of pitiful agitation. He explained
that by telling us that he was nervous about whether
he’d be allowed to bury Brotherhood or not; but
when you come to think of it, does that account
for the extraordinary excitement and nervousness he
showed about the whole thing? Anyhow, the jury
found suicide—and remember, he always wanted
us to believe it was suicide—and immediately his
trouble vanished. He seemed to lose interest in the
business from then on.</p>

<p>“But over one thing he did give himself away.
Do you remember, when Carmichael produced that
photo of Miss Rendall-Smith, Marryatt professed
not to know who it was? Now, I fancy there are
aspects of the case here which we haven’t been
able to trace yet. But on the face of it, it was
curious that Marryatt, who has lived here for quite
a long time and knows all the clerical society round
here, shouldn’t know the daughter of the man who
used to be Rector of Binver. For some reason, he
preferred not to be in the know. He said he’d take
it over to Binver and identify it. He took it over:
it was early-closing day, and Campbell’s studio must
really have been shut. But Marryatt comes back
with some lame story about Campbell not being shut
after all; and he tells us, not only whom the
photograph represents, but the whole life-story of the lady
into the bargain. I say, he made a mistake there.
We ought to have been suspicious.</p>

<p>“We were not suspicious; he came and played
bridge in my room the same night. It gave him
a very nasty turn when, as we all thought, the
photograph altered its appearance. He was
completely unstrung; and the form his nerves took was
an intense desire that we should drop the inquiry
altogether. He had begun to grow superstitious,
as so many murderers do. But he made the best
use he could of it, by trying to shut down our
investigations on the strength of it. That failed, but
something even better turned up—Davenant’s hiding
in the secret passage. By the way, I’m pretty well
convinced, though I can’t prove it, that it was
Marryatt and not Davenant who took away the
copy of that paper, with the cipher on it. Of course,
when we found Davenant, it not only concealed the
fact that he had taken away the cipher, but also
turned the suspicion into quite a different channel.</p>

<p>“Here, I must admit, Marryatt shows up badly.
He saw an innocent man accused, and he took no
action to exculpate him. On the contrary, he stated
to me quite emphatically his belief in Davenant’s
guilt. But we mustn’t judge him hardly; he may
have meant—he may still mean, for all we know,
to come forward if Davenant is found guilty.
Meanwhile, there’s one more piece of evidence which
I understand now, though it has bothered us a good
deal. You remember the thing we call the
‘washing-list,’ the words we found on the back of the
anonymous letter?”</p>

<p>“Yes, rather. What about it?”</p>

<p>“Well, it clearly wasn’t part of the cipher, was
it?”</p>

<p>“Probably not—one can’t be certain, but it didn’t
look like it.”</p>

<p>“Well then, you’ve got to choose, it seems to
me, between two possibilities. One is that this
sheet of paper—it’s only a half-sheet in any
case—was blank until the cipher was written on it.
Then it passed into Brotherhood’s possession, and
Brotherhood, looking about for a piece of paper to
jot down a list on, found this one and used it.”</p>

<p>“That’s what I’d assumed.”</p>

<p>“In that case, it’s hard to see any special
significance about the list, isn’t it? It’s not in
Brotherhood’s writing, apparently; but of course if he wrote
it in the train, it’s possible that his handwriting
would be untraceable.”</p>

<p>“What’s the other possibility?”</p>

<p>“Why, just the other way round. That the list,
whatever its meaning may be, was written on that
piece of paper first. And then the murderer,
wanting to send the cipher message to Brotherhood, took
up that piece of paper at random to write it on,
without noticing that there were already four words
pencilled on the back.”</p>

<p>“That’s possible, certainly.”</p>

<p>“Well, don’t you see, in that case the list becomes
very important, because it was written not by
Brotherhood but by the murderer, and it may
accidentally give us a clue to the murderer’s character.</p>

<p>“A rather obscure clue. As far as I remember
all it said was Socks, Vest, Hem, Tins.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but look here: do you remember my asking
whether those words were written on the paper,
right at the edge of the paper, before or after the
sheet was torn in half? Well, my own belief has
always been that those are only parts of words, and
that the other half, possibly with a lot more
writing as well, was lost to us when the sheet was torn.”</p>

<p>“And you’ve restored the full words?”</p>

<p>“I think I have. I’m just going to write it out
for you.” And, after scribbling for a moment, he
put before Gordon two sheets of paper; one, which
was blank, partly covered the other, so as to hide
part of what had been written on it.</p>

<p>“Well, that’s all correct,” said Gordon: “Socks,
Vest, Hem, Tins, all present. Do you want me to
guess the other halves of the words—the first half,
I suppose, in each case? Because I give you fair
warning that I have never guessed a riddle in my
life.”</p>

<p>Reeves took away the upper sheet of paper, and
made Gordon read again.</p>

<p>“Hassocks, Harvest, Anthem, Mattins—well, I’m
blowed! You ought to be given a fountain-pen
for this sort of thing.”</p>

<p>“But seriously, isn’t it almost certain that those
were the words of the original, before the sheet
was torn in half? What connected them, of course,
we can’t say. But they’re all ecclesiastical
words—at least, you can say that ‘harvest’ is an
ecclesiastical word at this time of the year, with harvest
festivals coming on. Could such a sheet of paper
have been lying about and been taken up carelessly
anywhere but in a clergyman’s rooms? And
honestly, doesn’t that clinch the case against
Marryatt?”</p>

<p>“Well, it certainly looks as if one would like
to ask Marryatt a few questions. Though, mark
you, I refuse to believe that Marryatt laid hands on
Brotherhood.”</p>

<p>“We can’t ask him questions. We must put him
to a test.”</p>

<p>“What sort of a test?”</p>

<p>“Well, surely the stick might come in handy
there. If we could somehow confront him with it
suddenly, and see how he takes it—I believe they
do that sort of thing in America.”</p>

<p>“Carmichael, I fancy, would tell you that the
system was originally Danish.”</p>

<p>“Why Danish?”</p>

<p>“Really, Reeves, what is the use of all your
researches into <i>Hamlet</i>, if you don’t realize that your
present idea is just what Hamlet does to the King
and Queen when the Players come on? I think,
you know, it’s rather a dangerous method, because
it’s so easy to suggest things to a person’s mind
when they’re not there already. But this I will
say, if Marryatt recoils from the sight of that stick
which you picked up this afternoon, or shows any
trace of confusion when he sees it, then—I won’t
say I’ll be prepared to regard Marryatt as guilty,
but I’ll be prepared to ask him for an explanation.”</p>

<p>“Well, Sadducee, have it your own way. We’ll
put that stick and the golf-ball lying out
prominently in my room. At dinner we’ll ask Marryatt
to come along afterwards. We’ll go out of dinner
early, and get into the secret passage. From there
we can watch and see what happens when he comes
in.”</p>

<p>“Don’t you think it would be a mistake to ask
him in? It might somehow put him on his guard. . . .
Yes, I know, I can make sure that he comes
into your room without being asked. Leave that
part to me, and stand by as soon as dinner’s over.
We can go up into the passage by the billiard-room
end.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch21">

<h2>Chapter XXI. <br/> The Test</h2>

<p>Marryatt came and sat with them at
dinner—a situation which called forth
Reeves’ utmost powers of self-control. He
was glad that Carmichael was there too; glad that
he had not communicated to him the suspicions
which he had just come to entertain. He could
not help admiring the easy way in which Gordon
managed to conceal <em>his</em> suspicions, talking to
Marryatt in his ordinary vein of rather pawky
pleasantry.</p>

<p>“Well, Marryatt, how was the collection?” was
the first sample of it.</p>

<p>“Normal, thank you. It’s fortunate that I don’t
depend on it for my livelihood, or you would have
to wait some time for that half-crown I owe you.”</p>

<p>“And how was the choir on the top notes?”</p>

<p>“There and thereabouts,” said Marryatt
cautiously.</p>

<p>“Do you know,” Carmichael put in, “there’s a
passage in Longfellow’s ‘Village Blacksmith’ which
has always seemed to me a curious example of
amphibology. The blacksmith, if you remember, is said
to go on Sunday to the church, where he ‘hears the
parson pray and preach, he hears his daughter’s
voice singing in the village choir.’ The context
shows that it is the blacksmith’s daughter who is
alluded to, but by the ordinary rules of grammar
it ought to be the parson’s daughter. I’m not much
of a church-goer myself——”</p>

<p>“Marryatt,” continued Gordon, “do you have
anthems often in church?”</p>

<p>The word “anthems” made Reeves feel as if he
had leapt a foot into the air. Marryatt, however,
showed no traces of excitement.</p>

<p>“Very rarely, I am thankful to say.”</p>

<p>“And those, I suppose, are at Evensong, not at
Mattins?”</p>

<p>Reeves frowned slightly. This effort to introduce
the significant words seemed to him painfully forced,
and at the same time quite useless. It was not
likely that Marryatt would connect the words on
the “washing-list” with the cipher he had
inadvertently sent to Brotherhood on the same sheet of
paper.</p>

<p>“No, not at Mattins. The <i lang="la">Te Deum</i>, I am afraid,
exercises the capacities of my choir to their full
limit.”</p>

<p>“You just have them on big days, I suppose, like
Harvest Festivals?”</p>

<p>“That kind of thing. Really, Gordon, you seem
very ecclesiastical this evening. Were you going to
offer to sing in the choir or anything?”</p>

<p>“No, my boy, not till you get some more
comfortable hassocks.”</p>

<p>“As a matter of fact, I have ordered some only
lately. I have to go up to London to-morrow to
see about them.”</p>

<p>Reeves’ blood thrilled. Only a tiny corroboration,
and yet enough to give him more confidence in
his diagnosis of the “washing-list.” Only lately
Marryatt had been ordering new hassocks—it all
fitted in.</p>

<p>“I congratulate you, Marryatt,” said Carmichael.
“At the funeral the other day, I am afraid I found
myself chiefly thinking about the unpleasantness of
the kneeling accommodation, instead of the virtues
of the deceased. By the way, have you declared
a truce in the controversy with Brotherhood, now
that he is no longer capable of replying?”</p>

<p>“I am afraid I continued the course this evening.
I could not very well leave it where I had left off
last Sunday. I had to meet, you see, his views
about immortality.”</p>

<p>Carmichael chuckled. “Well, let’s hope
Brotherhood won’t walk,” he said. “It would be very
embarrassing for you, Marryatt, if Brotherhood’s
ghost came back to continue the discussion. It
would speak with so much expert knowledge.”</p>

<p>“Really, Carmichael,” said Marryatt, “I wish you
wouldn’t say those things. You told us yourself
that you don’t believe in spiritualistic phenomena.”</p>

<p>“It’s all right,” said Gordon, “you’ll be able to
exorcise him if he does turn up again. Try driving
a stake through his body, I’m told it’s effective.
Hullo!” he added, consulting his watch, “I’d no idea
it was so late. I promised I’d go and help
Murdoch fix up his wireless. So long——” and he
disappeared, giving a slight tug at Reeves’ coat as he
left.</p>

<p>He did not seem, however, to be in a hurry to
redeem his promise. Instead, he made straight for
Marryatt’s room, taking the stairs three at a time;
and his proceedings in Marryatt’s room were
sufficiently curious to be worth recording in detail.
First, he took two out of the three pipes which lay
there, and hid them carefully behind the coal-scuttle.
Then he pulled the remaining pipe in half;
picked a strand or two of tobacco out of the nearest
tin, and rammed these tightly down the stem of the
pipe, close to the mouthpiece. There were a couple
of feathers on the mantelpiece; these he
unscrupulously put in his pocket. And, “Now, my friend,” he
said to himself out loud, as he left the room, “I think
we’ve spiked your guns. I for one shall be
surprised if you don’t come along hunting for
pipe-cleaners.” And so he went down and rejoined
Reeves in the deserted billiard-room.</p>

<p>The Committee had not yet decided what action
to take about the secret passage, and it was with
no difficulty that the two friends entered it again
from the billiard-room end, and made their way
along it, guided by Reeves’ torch. If it had lost
its thrill of human mystery, it had acquired instead
a kind of impersonal dreariness. One had not
looked for ghosts, when one was expecting a
murderer to be lurking there; now, you caught your
breath a little as you passed the hiding-hole. Priests
had lain close here many times; strange irony, that
it should now be serving as a vantage-point for
spying on a clerical delinquent. There were two
cracks in the panelling of Reeves’ room, and through
either you could see, in the shifting firelight, the
dark outlines of the oaken cudgel that lay against
Reeves’ arm-chair. By a grim accident, it stood
exactly as if it were being held in the right hand
of some one seated there. It could not fail to catch
the eye of anyone who turned on the electric light,
when he came in.</p>

<p>Voices, echoed up the staircase, proclaimed the
breaking up of the dining-tables. They could
distinguish Carmichael’s high-pitched accents, as he
told an interminable story at the foot of the
stairs—no doubt to Marryatt, who still delayed his
coming. Then at last they heard Marryatt’s step, the
rather boyish, light step that characterized him; he
was still crooning, if further identification were
needed, the hymn Reeves had heard from the
church-yard.</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">Though, like a wanderer,</p>
<p class="i3">The sun gone down,</p>
<p class="i2">Darkness comes over me,</p>
<p class="i3">My rest a stone,</p>
<p class="i2">Still in my dreams I’d be——</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p class="noindent">and the sounds died away with the footfalls, as
Marryatt turned the corner into his own room.</p>

<p>Then there was silence; a silence fraught with
expectation, and for Gordon with anxiety. Why
hadn’t he come? Had he, after all—one ought to
have considered that—another pipe in his pocket?
Had some splinter or paper-clip succeeded in
removing the all-important obstruction? No;
Marryatt’s door was suddenly flung open with an
impatient gesture; Marryatt’s step was heard again in
the passage; Marryatt’s voice still found occupation
in rendering the hymn, but more savagely now—you
pictured a bear robbed of her whelps.</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">There let my way appear,</p>
<p class="i2">Steps unto heaven,</p>
<p class="i1">All that Thou sendest me</p>
<p class="i2">In mercy given——</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p class="noindent">and at that the door suddenly swung open, and the
light was switched on.</p>

<blockquote class="verse"><div>

<p class="i1">Angels to beckon me——</p>

</div></blockquote>

<p>The voice stopped dead in mid-tone. There was
a sharp, nerve-wracking crash as a pipe fell on the
floor-boards. Marryatt was standing in the doorway
as if transfixed, staring at the oaken stick, his
face distorted with terror. Half in excitement,
half in relief, Reeves drew a deep breath, which
came out with a slight whistle—he must be careful
not to do that again, or he might betray his
presence. . . . No, precaution was needless.
Marryatt had turned; he strode in silence down the
passage like a man pursued, and they heard his door
shut behind him, the key turn in the lock.</p>

<p>Very cautiously, Reeves and Gordon pushed aside
the settee which blocked the entrance of the passage,
and stepped out into the room. Marryatt had left
his pipe where it lay, had not turned off the light
as he went out.</p>

<p>“Now,” said Reeves, “what d’you make of
Marryatt’s innocence?”</p>

<p>“I’m going along to his room,” said Gordon.</p>

<p>“No, look here, you mustn’t do that. We haven’t
decided what we’re going to say to him, what we’re
to do about it. Leave him alone for the present.”</p>

<p>“I’m not going in,” said Gordon. He tiptoed
along the passage outside, till he came opposite
Marrayatt’s door, and stood irresolute. Then suddenly
he heard a muffled voice from inside. “Oh, my
God!” and again, “Oh, my God!” He tiptoed back
again, his face grave. “Look here, Reeves, I can’t
understand it. I tell you, I can’t understand
it.”</p>

<p>“It doesn’t much matter whether we understand
it or not; the point is, what to do about it? We
can have explanations later on. But I daren’t go
to a man and say, ‘Look here, are you a murderer?’
Besides, I know he is one. I can’t simply tell the
police what I know, and leave them to get on with
it; it seems so mean. Besides, I don’t think I want
anything to happen to Marryatt. Only I’ve promised
Miss Rendall-Smith that I’ll do my best to get
Davenant off. What am I to do?”</p>

<p>“If you feel like that—I suppose you wouldn’t
trust me to talk to him?”</p>

<p>“It’s awfully good of you, but you know, I feel
it’s up to me. I must form my own conclusions.”</p>

<p>“Then, if I were you, I’d write him a letter,
simply pointing out that there are certain actions
of his which you can’t quite explain, and asking
him to explain them. Tell him you’re still worried
over Brotherhood’s murder, and feel that perhaps
he may be concealing something, from whatever
motive, which might lead you to the truth if you
knew about it. Reeves, I’m sure the man isn’t a
murderer: you only want to get him to explain
things.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but the whole business hangs together,
I can’t tell him how I formed my suspicions without
telling him the whole of the evidence I’ve got; and
that means putting it to him straight out. I must
see that he manages to exculpate Davenant; as long
as he does that, I don’t mind if he goes abroad—I
don’t mind giving him time to get away. But I must
show him where he stands, and I must get a
confession out of him.”</p>

<p>“But the thing’s impossible!”</p>

<p>“Look here, I’ve got it—the telephone! That
lets you talk to a man without seeing his face,
without letting him answer if you don’t want him to;
you can treat him as if he wasn’t there. I know it
sounds a silly dodge, but you see my idea, don’t
you?”</p>

<p>“I should have thought it would be rather public.
Can’t the people at the exchange overhear
everything if they want to?”</p>

<p>“Yes; I’d forgotten that. I know—the speaking-tube
in the steward’s office! I can get the steward
to let me have the use of the room for ten minutes in
the slack time to-morrow morning. Then I’ll call
up to Marryatt and tell him all I want to.”</p>

<p>“The trouble about that speaking tube is, it isn’t
really made for dialogue. I mean, you have to
speak and listen alternately through the same tube.”</p>

<p>“All the better. I don’t want any interruptions
from him. Now, a game of bezique for Heaven’s
sake: my nerves are all anyhow.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch22">

<h2>Chapter XXII. <br/> In the Fog</h2>

<p>“Hullo, Marryatt, is that you?”</p>

<p>“Yes; who’s speaking?”</p>

<p>“It’s about Brotherhood. You’ll guess
before I’ve finished who it is speaking, so I’d better
tell you at once; it’s Reeves. I am going to talk
to you for about ten minutes through this tube, and
you’ll see for yourself as I go along that it’s to
your own interest to hear me out to the end. I’ve
chosen this way of speaking to you purposely, so
as to save you the embarrassment of an interview.
But, of course, it’s no good your trying to interrupt,
because I shouldn’t hear if you did.</p>

<p>“I have managed to trace your movements during
this last week pretty exactly, and I’m going to
describe them to you, so that you can see how much
I know, and how little use it is for you to try and
put up any denial. Of course, I may make little
mistakes about the details, but I think you’ll find
that there is not much wrong.</p>

<p>“I can understand you not liking Brotherhood;
few of us did. But while the rest of us simply
disliked him, you hated him. Whether you hated
him before he began giving his atheist lectures I
don’t know. I dare say there was a quarrel
beforehand and that was what made him give the
lectures. Anyhow, when he started trying to
undermine the beliefs of your parishioners, your hatred
reached such a pitch that you determined to do
away with him. I am not going to moralize about
all that; I suppose you felt at the time that you
were doing God’s work, and you fortified yourself
with precedents from the Bible. To you, perhaps,
it was like crushing some noxious insect. I’m not
going to argue morality.</p>

<p>“One characteristic scruple detained you. You
did not shrink from undoing God’s work by
destroying the material body of the man you hated, but
you trembled for the prospects of his soul if his
life was thus suddenly brought to an end. You
decided that you must warn him of the danger he
ran, but how were you to warn him without risk
of discovery? You sent him a present of a book
about immortality; that seemed natural enough, as
it was the subject he had been lecturing about.
Then, anonymously, you sent him a message which
consisted only of figures, yet so arranged that a
clever man like Brotherhood could see that the
figures were a cipher, and that this book was the
key to the cipher. The message you sent ran, ‘You
will perish if you go back upon your faith.’ Then
you felt you had warned him sufficiently. As a
matter of fact, he left the book in the train on
Monday, and therefore your warning, which reached
him on Tuesday, was in any case too late.</p>

<p>“Your alibi was brilliantly thought out
beforehand. You went up to London, being careful to
tell us all that you were going. You took with
you no weapon except a heavy stick. But you
had a powerful ally in the grey fog which hung
over the railway line that day; the fog which made
the movements of the trains slow, their timing
uncertain, their carriages almost invisible from each
other. You had chosen your day well. You knew,
I take it, beforehand that Brotherhood’s bankruptcy
would soon be public property; you took good care,
anyhow, to inform yourself of the fact when you
got up to Town. That meant that the way was
clear for you; the murder would be interpreted as
suicide.</p>

<p>“You went up by the same train as Brotherhood;
you took care to come back by the same train.
You shadowed him, I suppose—easy work for you
to do that unseen in the grey fog. You saw him
enter a carriage which was (I think) the last of a
coach. That was probably a disappointment to you,
because you could not take the one immediately
behind. No matter, you took the one immediately
in front instead. Each travelled first, and each was
alone in his carriage; it was not difficult to secure
that in such weather, on such an unfrequented train.
The whistle blew, and you went out into the fog.</p>

<p>“You could do nothing on the first stage of your
journey; it was necessary for you to reach ground
that you knew; you could not be certain, in the
fog, that the blow would be fatal if you struck it
elsewhere. You waited till the train got to the
beginning of the Paston Oatvile viaduct, and there,
as you expected, it was held up by the signals.
That meant that you were just at the beginning
of the viaduct, so that a body falling over must
necessarily go to its destruction. It meant also,
owing to the curve, that the other coaches were all
but out of sight from yours; in any case, you were
hardly visible in the fog.</p>

<p>“Then it was that you took out of your pocket a
golf-ball—a golf-ball of a very common kind, by
which you could not be traced. Leaning out of the
window on the left-hand side of the train, you threw
the ball backwards, in such a way as to hit the
further window of Brotherhood’s carriage, the
window on the side furthest from the engine, I mean.
Your idea was that the ball, bouncing off with
considerable speed, would fall into the valley below,
where of course it would arouse no suspicion if it
were found. As a matter of fact, it lodged at the
top of the viaduct and was there found by me.</p>

<p>“Brotherhood was startled at the noise, and, as
you had hoped, he put his head out of the window.
As you had hoped, he looked backwards in doing so,
because it was the back window that the ball had
hit. At that moment you brought down your
stick with a violent blow over his skull, and he must
have fallen doubled up over the window-frame.</p>

<p>“It was not difficult, with the train stationary
and the fog all around you, to climb along the
foot-board, still on the left-hand side of the train. You
had to be quick, though, for the train might move
on at any moment. You removed his season-ticket,
and substituted a third-class ticket for Paston
Whitchurch. The train you were on did not stop at
Paston Whitchurch; the ticket, then, would make
people think that Brotherhood had fallen from the
slow train that went past later. You changed the
time of his watch, in order to confirm this
impression. You put a wrist-watch on him, registering the
same time, so as to make assurance doubly sure.
There you over-reached yourself; there is no need
to explain how.</p>

<p>“All this you did while your victim, I suppose,
still breathed. And still the train was held up by
the signals. There was time to search the pockets.
Your cipher-letter was still in his pocket; you
thought there was no need to destroy that, because
its secret could not be penetrated. You forgot that
on the back of the sheet of note-paper on which you
sent the cipher message you had jotted down some
references to anthems, mattins, and so on, which
helped me ultimately to trace the crime to you.
You also found a coupon for a sleeping-carriage;
that, too, you did not destroy, but you altered the
dates, because your quick brain saw that a
sleeping-carriage coupon for Tuesday would not have been
held by a man travelling in the later train, the 4.50.</p>

<p>“Then you took the living body and heaved it
out of the carriage-window, over the viaduct. That
was just as the train started, or when it had already
started; it was a moment later that you saw you
had left the dead man’s hat in the rack, and threw
that over too. One thing you allowed to fall over
without meaning to—the stick with which you
inflicted the first wound; it slipped, I suppose, from
your hand: certainly it was found just on the edge
of the viaduct, a few feet down the embankment.
When you reached Binver you came straight back
to us, and were careful to tell us that you had come
back by the three o’clock train.</p>

<p>“You have had some bad moments since then—when
I sliced my drive into the osiers, and found
the body, and you had to look at your victim; when
your superstitious fears made you think that a
photograph had come to life; when you saw on my
shelves, and stole from them, the very copy of
Momerie’s <i>Immortality</i> which you had given to
Brotherhood: when, finally, you came into my room
last night, and saw in front of you the stick with
which the crime was committed. But what should
have caused you more horror is the fact than an
Innocent man, Davenant, is awaiting trial on the
charge of murder, and you have taken no steps, so
far, to exculpate him. That I cannot understand,
but I hope you meant to do so; certainly you will
have to do so.</p>

<p>“I want you to write out a full confession of these
facts, and to bring it to my room to sign it; I will
witness it, and Gordon, to whom the facts
themselves are already known. After that, you are free
to go where you will. Respect for your cloth and
for our friendship makes this the only possible
course for us. Your confession will not be made
public unless that is the only way of saving
Davenant from execution or a life sentence. Of course,
we are taking a considerable risk ourselves——”</p>

<p>The door of the steward’s office swung open, and
Carmichael came in, saying as he turned the corner,
“Hullo, Reeves, have you heard that Davenant
has confessed? Oh, sorry, I didn’t see you were
telephoning.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch23">

<h2>Chapter XXIII. <br/> Marryatt breaks the Pledge</h2>

<p>Mordaunt Reeves looked up in a dazed
way, still holding the tube. “What was
that you said?”</p>

<p>“I said, Davenant’s confessed. It’s an
extraordinary thing, you know, the way we use ambiguous
expressions, and expect the other man to interpret
them in the right sense. Davenant, now, is a
Catholic, and therefore it’s absurd for me to say
‘Davenant’s confessed’ as if I were to rush into the
room and say ‘Davenant’s shaved.’ But when I
say ‘Davenant’s confessed,’ I mean, and expect you
to understand me as meaning, Davenant has
confessed <em>to the police that he murdered Brotherhood</em>.”</p>

<p>“Marryatt, Marryatt!” Reeves held his ear to
the tube, but no answer came. “Excuse me one
moment, Carmichael; I must just go up and see
Marryatt.”</p>

<p>“Ambiguity again; do you mean upstairs, or up
to London?”</p>

<p>“Upstairs, of course, why——”</p>

<p>“In that case, I’d better tell you that I met
Marryatt, five minutes ago or thereabouts, running
violently in the direction of the station.”</p>

<p>“Running?”</p>

<p>“Yes. It was my conjecture that he intended
to catch the 10.30, and had not very much time to
do it in.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord, this is awful! I say, have you seen
Gordon?”</p>

<p>“He is just outside. He wanted me to do a
round with him, but I found myself unable to
comply. The fact is, my wife returns to-day, and
I have to go down to the house to prepare for
her—just see that the servants are not intoxicated, and
that kind of thing. If you want a round, Gordon
is your man.”</p>

<p>“Thanks, I think that’s just what I do want.
Hullo, Gordon, you going out? Just let me get my
clubs, and I’m with you.”</p>

<p>It was not till they were walking together along
the fairway from the first tee that Reeves opened
his griefs. “I say, have you heard this about
Davenant?”</p>

<p>“Yes, most inconsiderate of him to confess just
when you’d arranged to clap the darbies on another
man. Lucky for you you hadn’t said anything to
Marryatt about it.”</p>

<p>“Well, the fact is, I had.”</p>

<p>“You had?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I’ve just been talking to him from the
steward’s office, through that confounded
metaphone thing. I told him the whole story, as we had
put it together——”</p>

<p>“I pass the <em>we</em>.”</p>

<p>“And I told him he must own up. He had no
chance of saying anything down the tube, of course,
and now it seems he has bolted for London.”</p>

<p>“Bolted! Why, of course, that was why he was
making streaks for the station at about sixty miles
an hour. Good Lord, Reeves, you <em>have</em> done it?
I believe you’ve convinced Marryatt, by sheer logic,
that he’s a murderer, when he’s nothing of the kind.”</p>

<p>“No, but I say, do you really think he’s bolted?”</p>

<p>“Looks like it, doesn’t it? Very much like the
old story of the man who telegraphed to the
Bishop to say ‘All is discovered; fly at once.’ Poor
old Marryatt must have a guilty conscience about
something, mustn’t he? I wonder if he’s been
embezzling the collections? I should think it would
be worth about a fortnight in quod, embezzling the
Paston Oatvile collections. My ball, I think.”</p>

<p>“I wish you’d take this thing seriously.”</p>

<p>“I’m doing my best; it was a beast of a lie.”</p>

<p>“I don’t mean the game, you fool, I mean Marryatt
clearing off like this. What happens if he really
tries to disappear? How am I to get at him? And
what’s it all about, anyhow?”</p>

<p>“I haven’t the faintest idea what it’s all about.
But if you ask me, I don’t believe Marryatt has
bolted for good. He wasn’t taking his clubs with
him.”</p>

<p>“You think he’ll come back this evening?”</p>

<p>“I should think almost certainly.”</p>

<p>“But look here, what the deuce am I to say to
him when he does?”</p>

<p>“Oh, leave all that to me. I’ll calm his fevered
brow. I told you yesterday there were one or two
little things I wanted Marryatt to explain, and you
wouldn’t let me. This time, I’m going to have it
my own way.”</p>

<p>“It’s awfully good of you if you . . . Oh, Lord,
right over the green, as usual . . . But, I say,
tell me about Davenant. How did you hear?”</p>

<p>“The head waiter was the source of the
information, but I gather it is on good authority.
According to the gossip of Binver, the police were trying
to incriminate your friend Miss Rendall-Smith, and
that’s how they got Davenant to own up. Dirty
dodge, rather, I think.”</p>

<p>“Trying to incriminate her? Then, of course,
it was the police who were shadowing her! She told
me yesterday she thought she was being watched.”</p>

<p>“That would be it, I suppose.”</p>

<p>“But then, how did Davenant explain all the
things that have been puzzling us all this time?”</p>

<p>“I don’t think he’s been interviewed by the <i>Daily
Mail</i> yet. But if you mean how he explained the
difficulty about the two trains, that’s very simple.
It wasn’t done from a train at all.”</p>

<p>“Not from a train?”</p>

<p>“No. He was walking with Brotherhood along
the railway line in the fog, and he lost his temper
and pitched him over. At least, that’s the story
they’re telling down at Binver.”</p>

<p>“Oh, I see. That being so, this for the hole.”</p>

<p>They went round again that afternoon. There
was really nothing else to be done; but Reeves was
in a pitiable state of suspense all the time, and the
hours travelled slowly. The 3.47 put down its
generous toll of passengers at Paston Oatvile, but
no Marryatt among them. Two more trains came
in, and still no Marryatt appeared: his place was
empty at the dinner-table. Reeves was in terror
that he might come back in the middle; in terror
that he might not come back at all. At last, as
they went out from dinner, they caught sight of
his face, looking white and haggard, in the entrance
hall. Reeves bounded upstairs, full of relief, while
Gordon marked down his man.</p>

<p>“Hullo, Marryatt? Had dinner? Good; come
and sit in the lounge for a bit. I’d been wanting
to see you.”</p>

<p>There was only one way to open the conversation.
“Have a small something in the whisky line,” he
suggested.</p>

<p>“No, thanks. Knocked off.”</p>

<p>“Knocked off! Why on earth? Are you going
to start a Band of Hope? I’m sorry, Marryatt, but
I’m afraid you won’t get many members to join.”</p>

<p>“No. It’s nothing of that sort. Doctor’s orders,
you know.”</p>

<p>“First time I ever heard of Beazly prescribing
that.”</p>

<p>“It wasn’t Beazly. I’ve just been up to London,
you know; I went to see a specialist.”</p>

<p>“I say, I’m awfully sorry; what’s wrong?
Heart?”</p>

<p>“Well, it was a sort of nerve man I went to.
Didn’t seem to be much use. He talked to me for
about half an hour about French cathedrals, and
then told me to knock off drinking and smoking.”</p>

<p>“Yes, but dash it all, what were your symptoms?”</p>

<p>“I say, Gordon, do you believe in—well, in ghosts
and things?”</p>

<p>“Not more than’s good for me. Why? You
been seeing spooks?”</p>

<p>“Look here, I wanted to tell somebody about it.
You know, of course, that I preached about
Brotherhood last night. I wasn’t quite sure whether it
was the thing to do—it seemed a bit unfair at the
time. Anyhow, I felt I ought to. Then at dinner,
if you remember, you and Carmichael were ragging
about it—wondering what would happen if old
Brotherhood came back.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I remember.”</p>

<p>“Well, of course that may have preyed on my
nerves a bit. Anyhow, I went upstairs to my room,
and found my pipe chocked up—you know.”</p>

<p>“Yes, it’s funny the way they do get chocked
up.”</p>

<p>“So I went along to Reeves’ room to bag one of
his pipe-cleaners. It was dark and he wasn’t in,
so I turned on the light. And there, right in front
of me, I saw old Brotherhood’s oak stick—the one
he used to carry with him. I remember, when he
preached on the village green. I remember his
quoting Johnson’s refutation of Berkeley—you know
the thing—and banging that stick on the ground.
That was the stick I saw.”</p>

<p>“In Reeves’ room?”</p>

<p>“Yes, by the side of his arm-chair. And—I didn’t
exactly <em>see</em> anything, you know, only it looked
exactly as if Brotherhood himself were sitting in
the chair, invisible, with his hand resting on the
stick. I was just telling myself I was a fool,
when—he breathed.”</p>

<p>“Who did?”</p>

<p>“I don’t know. There was nobody in the
room—nobody visible, I mean. That was too much for
me, I’m afraid. I went to my room and locked
myself in. You see, I’m psychic, rather. Always
have been, from a kid.”</p>

<p>“And was that all your trouble?”</p>

<p>“No. I had half thought about seeing a man
about it while I was up in London anyhow. And
then, just as I was starting for the train, that beastly
metaphone thing in my room whistled. So I went
and said ‘Who’s speaking?’—and—I may be an
awful fool, you know, but I thought the thing said
‘It’s Brotherhood.’ And at that I fairly dropped
the tube and raced for the train. Then in London I
went to see this fool of a specialist, and of course he
told me I’d been overdoing it.”</p>

<p>Gordon’s eyes twinkled. “You’d have saved
yourself a couple of guineas at least,” he said, “if
you’d talked to me earlier.”</p>

<p>“Oh! Why, what’s the point?”</p>

<p>“Well—that stick. It had a perfect right to be
in Reeves’ room. He found it yesterday afternoon
on the railway line; Brotherhood must have dropped
it when—he fell. So of course Reeves brought it
back here, and it was standing up against his chair
last night. There was nobody sitting there.”</p>

<p>“But hang it all, I swear I heard somebody
breathing.”</p>

<p>“You did. That was just bad luck. The fact
is, Reeves and I were fooling about inside that
secret passage, and saw you come in. And the
breathing was done by Reeves, off.”</p>

<p>“Good Lord! Why didn’t you tell me?”</p>

<p>“Well, you didn’t give us much chance, did you,
going and locking yourself up in your room like
that? And then this morning Reeves ’phoned you
up from the steward’s office to tell you the news.”</p>

<p>“What news?”</p>

<p>“That the mystery about Brotherhood’s murder
was solved.”</p>

<p>“Oh, yes—Davenant did it, didn’t he? They
were telling me about it at the station.”</p>

<p>“Well, you see, Reeves must have started by
saying ‘About Brotherhood,’ or something like that.
And then, like a fool, you dropped the tube and
legged it for London.”</p>

<p>“Well, upon my word! Do you know, Gordon,
now I come to think of it, I don’t mind if I do.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch24">

<h2>Chapter XXIV. <br/> Gordon offers the Consolation of
Philosophy<a href="#fn1" id="fnref1" class="pginternal">¹</a></h2>

<p>Gordon fell into Reeves’ other arm-chair
and shouted with laughter. Nothing could
be more disagreeable to nerves already
jangled. Reeves almost shook him into position,
demanding explanations.</p>

<p>“It’s all right,” he said at last. “You get all the
luck, Reeves. Marryatt wasn’t listening at the
other end of the metaphone. And all the time you
were talking through it, it was just a soliloquy.”</p>

<p>“Thank God for that! But how did you explain
it all? What did you tell him?”</p>

<p>“Oh, I just told him the truth—part of the truth.
And you must really get out of that habit of
wheezing, because it was your wheezing behind the secret
panel that made Marryatt think it was
Brotherhood’s ghost sitting in your room last night!”</p>

<p>“You mean that’s what frightened Marryatt?
Why did he run away this morning, then?”</p>

<p>“He thought it was Brotherhood telephoning to
him. Lord, what a day!”</p>

<p>“And you’ve explained everything to him?”</p>

<p>“Yes, I’ve explained it all; I’d have explained it
yesterday, if you’d let me.”</p>

<p>“Come now, don’t try and persuade me you didn’t
think yourself that Marryatt was guilty?”</p>

<p>“Guilty of murder? Not for a single, solitary
moment. I did think there was something wrong
with him—so there was, he was hag-ridden with
nightmare about Brotherhood. But I never agreed
with you about Marryatt being a murderer, and, to
do me justice, I never said so.”</p>

<p>“That’s all very well, but you never showed me
where I was wrong in my interpretation of the whole
thing.”</p>

<p>“I know; it was no good showing you where
you were wrong, because you were so confoundedly
ingenious at devising fresh explanations. Honestly,
I did put one or two difficulties to you, but in a
second you’d persuaded yourself to believe that they
were no difficulties at all. And of course there were
heaps more.”</p>

<p>“Such as?”</p>

<p>“Well, you persisted in regarding the whole thing
as a deliberate, carefully planned murder. But
if you come to think of it, the circumstances that
favoured the murder were just the sort of
circumstances that couldn’t have been foreseen. How could
a man like Marryatt know that Brotherhood was
due to go bankrupt? He knows no more about the
City than you do. And the fog—look how the fog
played up all through! How was Marryatt to know
there was going to be a fog on the very day on
which his attempt would be made? Yet, without
a fog, the attempt would have been perfectly
desperate.”</p>

<p>“Yes, I suppose that’s true.”</p>

<p>“And it wasn’t merely the general setting, it
was the details. How could Marryatt know that
the train would be held up by signals just there?
How could he tell that Brotherhood would get into
the part of the train which hadn’t got a corridor,
and that he would get into an empty carriage?
What would he have been able to do, if
Brotherhood had happened to come back as he always
did—did, in fact, come back on Tuesday—in a crowded
train like the 3.47? How could he be certain that
nobody had seen Brotherhood get into the three
o’clock? That nobody had noticed him at
Weighford? Alternately, don’t you see, you make your
man take the most superhumanly cunning
precautions, and then trust to blind chance. But those
are all objections of detail. I didn’t mention them
because, as I say, you’d have found some sort of
answer for each. My real objection was much
deeper.”</p>

<p>“Well, why didn’t you tell me about <em>that</em>?”</p>

<p>“Because you wouldn’t have begun to understand
it. It’s concerned, you see, with people, not with
things. It’s simply that Davenant is the kind of
person who would kill a man, and Marryatt isn’t.”</p>

<p>“You mean because Marryatt’s a parson? But,
dash it all, Davenant goes to church.”</p>

<p>“Davenant goes to church, but he isn’t the sort
of person who goes to church. With Protestants,
I mean, it’s ordinarily safe to assume that if people
do go to church they are of a church-going type;
they belong to the ‘unco’ guid.’ That isn’t a safe
assumption to make about Catholics; they seem to
go to church whether they’re ‘unco’ guid’ or not.
I don’t mean that Davenant’s a stage villain, but
he’s just an ordinary sort of person, and he’s got
red blood in him, whereas Marryatt hasn’t—I hope
it’s not unkind to say so. He wouldn’t kill a man;
you may almost say he couldn’t.”</p>

<p>“Couldn’t morally, you mean, or couldn’t
physically?”</p>

<p>“I don’t mean either. ‘Couldn’t psychically’
would be nearer the mark. For one thing,
Davenant’s fought in the war, and killed people, I
expect—he was a bombing officer, wasn’t he? Well, you
know, I think to most people that makes an
enormous difference. I suppose that’s why there’s
generally a ‘crime-wave’ after wars—part of the
reason, anyhow. People have got accustomed to
killing, and it isn’t easy to murder people till you’ve
done that.”</p>

<p>“And Marryatt, you mean, really couldn’t kill a
man?”</p>

<p>“Physically he could—he’s rather strong.
Morally he could—morally any of us could do
anything. Or so they taught us when we were small.
But there’s a third difficulty you’ve got to get over,
if you want to murder people; a sort of nervous
repugnance to the job. I don’t say that if
Marryatt went to the bad, he mightn’t screw himself up
to the point of shoving poison into somebody’s tea.
But he couldn’t kill a man with his hands.”</p>

<p>“I know; it doesn’t sound probable. And yet,
I suppose a person with a fixed idea isn’t much
different from a madman, is he? And my argument
was that Marryatt had a sort of fixed idea about
religion.”</p>

<p>“Yes; but, don’t you see, he hasn’t. Marryatt’s
a very good chap, and he thinks all the doctrines
he preaches are more probable than not, but his
religion doesn’t sweep him off his feet: the man who
denies it doesn’t seem to him something less than
human. That was another reason against your
theory. Psychologically, Marryatt hasn’t got the
apparatus to do what you thought he did. Morally,
he hasn’t got the motive to act as you thought he
did.”</p>

<p>“Well, I seem to have made a pretty good ass of
myself all round. I wonder if anybody in the world
has ever been so led astray by a theory?”</p>

<p>“Anybody ever? Why, my dear Reeves, you’re
in exactly the same position there as about
three-quarters of the modern world: they are all led astray
by theories. Only you were at least led astray by
your own theory, not by one you’d borrowed at
second-hand.”</p>

<p>“What, you mean scientific theories in medicine
and so on? Taking the doctors’ word for it that
it’s a good thing to be vaccinated, and that kind of
thing?”</p>

<p>“No, hang it all, it would be unfair to complain
of that. It’s better for the doctors to have a false
theory than no theory at all. They make mistakes,
but sooner or later they find out they were wrong.
It’s bad luck on all the people who happen to have
died from getting the wrong treatment, but still,
we did our best. No, I don’t mean the guess-work
by which we live from day to day, and which is
necessary to living: I mean the theories learned
people propound to us about the past, about the
meaning of human history.”</p>

<p>“Darwin, and all that?”</p>

<p>“No, not exactly. I grant you that does
illustrate my point. Evolution is only a theory, and the
relationship of the monkey to the man not even a
plausible theory; and yet they have gone on so
long without being positively disproved that
everybody talks as if they were proved. The scientist
still treats evolution as a theory, the educationalist
treats it as a fact. There’s a curious sort of statute
of limitations in the learned world which makes it
impossible to call a man a liar if he has gone on
lying successfully for fifty years. But, after all,
there’s something to be said for the Evolutionists.
They did set out to explain a real problem, why there
should be more than one kind of thing in the world;
and they don’t even profess to have explained it.
The theorizers I mean are people who create
problems where none exist—as you did, Reeves, when
you insisted on regarding it as an open question who
murdered Brotherhood. They are people who trust
circumstantial evidence in the face of all common
human probability, as you did, Reeves, when you
wanted to convict a chump like Marryatt of murder
on the strength of a chain of silly coincidences.”</p>

<p>“All this comes out of your diary, I suppose?”</p>

<p>“No, I haven’t written it up yet. I’m going to
write it up, about half an hour from now, that’s
why you’re getting all this thrown at you. You see,
when I think of you talking through that metaphone,
it strikes me as a splendid allegory of the whole
historical method in criticism—or rather, that abuse
of the historical method which commonly usurps the
title. The man who has theories about history is
usually just that—a man talking down the
metaphone, making a series of false statements to a person
who isn’t there, and defying him to disprove them.”</p>

<p>“Gordon, I believe you’re going to solve the
problem of my vocation. I’ve always hankered after
being an amateur detective, but it seems to me the
job is less attractive than I supposed—facts will
keep coming in. But, by your way of it, it sounds
as if I might be a success in one of the learned
professions.”</p>

<p>“Certainly. Be an anthropologist, Reeves. Fish
up a lot of facts, alleged on very doubtful authority,
about primitive man—his marriage ceremonies, his
burial customs, his system of land tenure. Look at
the whole mass of facts squint-eyed until you can
see a theory in it. Embrace the theory; trot out all
the facts which support your theory; write a long
appendix on all the facts which contradict your
theory, showing them to be insignificant or irrelevant
(you’d do that all right) and there you are. You’ll
do quite as good anthropological research as——”</p>

<p>“Is there money in it?”</p>

<p>“I thought you were all right for money. No, if
you’re out for that, I should take to psycho-analysis.
The system’s the same, generally speaking, only
instead of dealing with primitive man, whom you
can disregard because he isn’t there, you are dealing
with a living man, who will probably tell you that
you are a liar. Then you tell him that he is losing
his temper, which is the sign of a strong inhibition
somewhere, and that’s just what you were saying
all along. The beauty of psycho-analysis is that it’s
all ‘Heads-I-win-tails-you-lose.’ In medicine, your
diagnosis of fever is a trifle disconcerted if the
patient’s temperature is sub-normal. In
psychoanalysis you say, ‘Ah, that just proves what I was
saying.’ ”</p>

<p>“It seems to me that I have been neglecting all
these openings for our young men.”</p>

<p>“Well, I don’t know, the psycho-business is
getting a bit over-crowded nowadays. But there are
still plenty of openings in the historical line. You
can read what theories you like into history, as long
as you are careful to neglect human probabilities,
and take your evidence entirely from a selection of
external facts. There is danger in it, of course; any
day some fool may dig up a great chunk of Livy,
and all your theories go wrong. Still, the obvious
remedy for that is to say that Livy was lying on
purpose, leaving false clues about deliberately, like
Marryatt, you know, on the railway line. All
documents, you see, which don’t happen to support your
point of view, thereby give themselves away as being
late and untrustworthy.”</p>

<p>“But I don’t think I know any history much.”</p>

<p>“That doesn’t matter; it’s quite easy to read your
stuff up if you confine yourself to a particular
period or a particular kind of history. For the
beginner, Church history may be confidently
recommended. Public interest in the subject is so small
that it is very unlikely any one will take the trouble
to contradict you. If the worst comes to the worst,
you can always fall back upon literary criticism, and
there you are on perfectly safe ground. A man with
a documentary hypothesis can defy the rudest
assaults of common sense.”</p>

<p>“How does one do that, exactly?”</p>

<p>“You have to start out by saying, ‘This
document consists of three parts. One part is genuine,
one part is spurious, the third part is faked evidence
put in to make the spurious stuff look as if it was
genuine!’ Then, you see, you are on velvet. You
reject altogether the parts of the document which
you don’t like. Then you take the remaining part,
and find that it still contains a certain sort of
dross—evidence which still conflicts with your theory.
That dross you purge away by calling it a deliberate
fake. The watch says 4.54—that is proof positive
that, in the first place, the murder took place at 3.54,
and, in the second place, the murderer tried to
pretend it didn’t. You see the idea? Now, the more
of that business you do, the more ingenious your
theory becomes, and the more ingenious your theory
becomes, the more easily will people accept it as
true. Half the statements which we regard as facts
in history and criticism are statements made by
critics, which are so ingenious that nobody has the
heart to doubt them. And so the silly old world
goes on. What if our forefathers are misjudged?
We keep our mouths, not our ears, to the metaphone,
and the honourable gentlemen get no opportunity
to reply: and it doesn’t matter much to them,
because, like sensible people, they’ve dropped their
end of the tube, and left us to talk into empty air.”</p>

<p>“Do you know, Gordon, I believe you talk an
awful lot of rot.”</p>

<p>“I know. But it isn’t all rot. Well, what are
you proposing to do?”</p>

<p>“I am proposing to devote myself in future to the
Game—the Game, the whole Game, and nothing but
the Game.”</p>

</div>

<hr class="x-ebookmaker-drop"/>

<div class="chapter" id="ch25">

<h2>Chapter XXV. <br/> The Dull Facts</h2>

<p class="address1">The Dormy-house,</p>
<p class="address2">Paston Oatvile,</p>
<p class="address3">Binver</p>
<p class="salutation">My dear Gordon,</p>

<p>Reeves has just been in to inform me that
Davenant has been hung. A laughable misconception,
of course; he has not been hung, he has been
hanged.</p>

<p>I write as you asked me to write, to supply what
information I can about the actual course of events
in connection with what is locally called the Links
Mystery. I have put it together with some
difficulty; part of it, of course, came out at the trial;
part I had from Miss Rendall-Smith, part from the
priest at Paston Bridge, upon whom I called specially
for the purpose. A not unintelligent man, who
seemed to me to know more about the neighbourhood
and the people who live here than Marryatt
will ever know. He was, of course, debarred by
professional scruples from telling me one or two
things about which my curiosity prompted me to
ask, but he did not appear to be unduly distressed
about Davenant. “Depend upon it, Mr. Carmichael,”
he said, “there’s others do worse and never
get found out. A nice, clean death he’ll make of it.
Goes to Communion every morning, you know—an
example to all of us.” I told him, of course, that
I was not narrow-minded, and could see good in all
religions.</p>

<p>Well, the outlines of the thing seem to have been
very simple indeed. Davenant saw that Brotherhood
meant to persecute the lady because of the
money, and determined to try and dissuade him.
Brotherhood was just leaving the office when
Davenant reached it; Davenant hailed a taxi, and followed
him. Brotherhood did not go straight to the
station; he went to a flat somewhere out Chelsea
way—no doubt this was where he used to spend his
weekends. No doubt he had decided that this double life
must come to an end, now that it was necessary for
him to live on his wife’s money, and therefore
wanted to collect all his personal effects. He came
out in about ten minutes’ time, cramming an
old-fashioned watch into his waistcoat pocket—presumably,
in the hurry of the moment, he wound up
this watch, which had been left about in the flat,
mistiming it by an hour. With the help of the
taximan he managed to get an enormous trunk on to the
cab and then set out for the station. He was nipping
pretty freely from a flask in his pocket. Davenant
shadowed him all the way at a distance: he could
not have kept up with him if he had not heard his
orders to the taxi-driver.</p>

<p>When he got to the station, Brotherhood bought
a third-class ticket, and crammed it in his
waistcoat pocket. The purpose of this appeared when
he was having his trunk labelled—it was cheaper
than paying excess luggage. He had his season-ticket
in his great-coat pocket. By the way, why
did we not question ourselves more over the singular
fact that Brotherhood’s body was found without
umbrella or great-coat, on such an inclement day?
He got into a first-class carriage, already occupied;
and Davenant, seeing that there was no chance of
a personal interview, travelled third himself, always
hoping that something would turn up.</p>

<p>At Paston Oatvile something did turn up—Brotherhood
got out of the train decidedly the worse
for drink. Davenant, it is clear, had up to this time
no sinister intentions, for he talked to one of the
porters when he alighted, and then went up to
Brotherhood and hailed him as an acquaintance.
Brotherhood was far too muzzy to be afraid of him;
he hailed him as good old Davenant, and suggested
that they should have a drink between trains at the
inn opposite the station. Davenant knew that
drinks were not served at that hour, but he
accompanied him willingly enough; they wasted a little
time trying the door, and then saw the train for
Paston Whitchurch steaming out of the station.
You will observe that Brotherhood was by now
artificially deprived of his luggage. His box went on
to Binver, so did his great-coat (with the season-ticket
in it) which he had thrown into the 4.50 from
the platform. Both were afterwards recovered by
the police, but were of little use to them.</p>

<p>Had Brotherhood been sober, he would have gone
back to the station, no doubt, so as to telegraph
to Binver about his things. As it was, he willingly
fell in with Davenant’s suggestion that they should
walk across to Paston Whitchurch by the field path,
crossing the valley by the railway viaduct. They
walked, then, through the fog, not much behind the
train; perhaps Davenant may even have suggested
the possibly of overtaking it if it were held up by
the signals. They did not, in fact, overtake it.
Davenant began to commiserate with Brotherhood
upon his bankruptcy, at which Brotherhood became
extremely cheerful, and explained that he had a
wife, a deuced fine woman, who had got a lot of his
money in her own name, and he was going back to
her. Davenant expostulated, threatened, implored;
nothing would disturb the drunkard’s irritating good
temper. Finally, Brotherhood became lyrical over
the charms of his wife just as they began to cross
the viaduct. It was too much for Davenant; in a
fit of disgusted rage, he turned and threw his gross
companion over the edge of the slope. There was
one startled cry, and then nothing but silence and
the fog.</p>

<p>Up to that moment Davenant had no plans; he
had not thought of murder even as a contingency.
It is true, he had to confess to having sent the
cipher warning: but this, he insisted, had been a
mere threat; he was anxious to prevent Brotherhood
doing anything before he could have a talk
with him. By the way, Brotherhood was at home
the week-end before his death, contrary to his usual
custom. Mrs. Bramston does not abide our
question, otherwise we might have elicited the fact from
her. Davenant travelled up in the same train with
him, and saw him beginning Momerie’s <i>Immortality</i>—that
was on the Monday morning; he bought a
copy himself at the bookstall and sent the cipher
to him, thinking he would probably be still reading
the same book the next day. The whole idea of
the cipher, he says, was a mere foolish whim on
his part.</p>

<p>He now found himself in urgent need of plans.
He did not know whether his victim was dead:
yet it would be risky to go right down into the
valley, and perhaps find that a corpse had already
been discovered. He determined to go and hide
until he got more news about this. Meanwhile,
the fog prevented him from seeing whether he had
made a clean job of it. He searched a little, and
found Brotherhood’s hat a little way down the
slope; that meant that he had not fallen sheer—he
might have left his stick behind too as he fell.
This, however, Davenant could not see in the fog.
He took the hat to the point at which the viaduct
railing began, and a little further, secure that this,
at any rate, would fall clear. He then measured
a few yards back, and dropped a golf-ball to mark
the spot. He thought, you see, that he might want
to go back there in better weather and look for the
stick. Then he turned back along the line and took
the path down to the dormy-house. The fog was
beginning to lift, but he met nobody. He knew the
secret passage from his boyhood, and thanked his
stars that he had never mentioned its existence to
any one in the Club. He had a confederate, of
course, among the Club servants—Miss Rendall-Smith
says she thinks it was an old servant of his
family’s; and this man, whose name has never
appeared, helped him to hide in the passage and
brought him, by arrangement with Sullivan, the
necessities of living.</p>

<p>It was from our own conversation—a singular
thought!—that he got most of his news. His
confinement, by the way, was not very irksome, since
he knew the habits of the members so well. He
used to shave in the Club washing-room, for
example; and got pickings from the food that went
down to the kitchen. More than once, when he
knew there was no danger of interruption, he came
out into the billiard-room and played a game, right
against left. He could keep in touch with all that
went on, and it was his intention, I gather, to come
out of his hiding-place in any case on the Saturday
afternoon, play a round in the evening, and go back
to the Hatcheries that night as if nothing had
happened. That was, of course, when the verdict of
suicide at the inquest made it seem as if he was free
from all suspicion.</p>

<p>But our proceedings bothered him badly. Especially
the photograph; he guessed from our talk that
it must be Miss Rendall-Smith’s, and knew that
it was likely to direct attention to her. He did not
hope to steal it, because the loss would be too
obvious, but he could not resist putting his arm through
the sliding panel while we were playing Bridge and
just taking a look at it. He had himself a photograph
of Miss Rendall-Smith in his pocket, taken at
the same sitting: when he first heard us talking
about photographs, he pulled this out to make sure
he had not lost it; and when he had the second
photograph in his hands he switched on his electric
torch for an instant (a risky thing to do) and
compared them. Then, in the dark, he put back the
wrong one by mistake.</p>

<p>Why he was so anxious to get back the copy of
the cipher, he did not explain. I fancy when he first
contemplated the idea he imagined that we had the
original; and to that, as we shall see, he did attach
importance. But he did not think he took much
risk when he purloined the cipher and put it back
again on finding it useless, or when he came out at
night to see what souvenirs of Brotherhood Reeves
had got. I think he was afraid of some fresh clue
which might inculpate Miss Rendall-Smith; and he
imagined, of course, that the watch at the door was
the only thing he had to be frightened of.</p>

<p>It was only next morning that he found some of
my chewing gum on his trousers, and guessed that
a trap had been laid for him. As soon as he heard
our movements upstairs he stepped out into the
billiard-room, and got his confederate to hide him
somewhere in the servants’ quarters. It was when
news was brought to him that the police were
investigating the cellar entrance that he really took
alarm, and decided to bolt for it. Even then he
kept his head, and if Reeves had been a little less
close on his trail he would have come back quietly
to Paston Whitchurch on that slow train, and it
would have been very difficult to incriminate him.
As it was, it was only a stiff door-handle that gave
him away.</p>

<p>It was Miss Rendall-Smith who explained to me
the mysterious writing on the back of the cipher.
The words were, of course, explained by what was
written on the other half-sheet before the sheet
was torn in two. Miss Rendall-Smith showed me
the full text of the thing, and I confess that at first
it meant nothing to me; you, no doubt, would have
taken the point with more readiness. Here it is,
anyhow.</p>

<table class="list">
<tbody><tr><td>S</td><td class="q1"/><td>O</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>C</td><td class="q1"/><td>R</td><td/></tr>
<tr><td>H</td><td class="q1"> a </td><td>S</td><td class="q2">socks</td></tr>
<tr><td>I</td><td class="q1">n t</td><td>E</td><td class="q2">rest</td></tr>
<tr><td>S</td><td class="q1">he</td><td>C</td><td class="q2">hem</td></tr>
<tr><td>M</td><td class="q1"> a </td><td>T</td><td class="q2">tins.</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

<p>It appears that this forms an acrostic, and is
connected with some kind of competition in the weekly
papers. The two first words have not been
successfully identified, the four last have. All we saw on
our half-sheet was the non-significant termination
of the last four words. I took it to Lees-Jones—you
remember Lees-Jones, our Acrostic expert?—and
he said it would have been very difficult to
reconstruct the original acrostic from these indications.
Your critical faculty will not fail to be delighted by
the mistake we made in reading “rest” as “vest,”
simply because it came next to the word “socks,”
which set up a train of mental association.</p>

<p>It appears that Davenant used to toy with this
peculiar sport, and Miss Rendall-Smith occasionally
helped him. On the Sunday before the murder
she sent him the answer, as far as she could decipher
it, on a full sheet of note-paper, and he tore off half
of this when he wanted to write the cipher message
to Brotherhood. The writing was Miss Rendall-Smith’s
own, and I fancy it was purely through
that, with the help of the Post Office, that the
police got on her track.</p>

<p>The sleeper-coupon was the most misleading clue
of all. It appears certain that Brotherhood
himself did not know of his impending bankruptcy
when he applied for it, and merely intended a business
visit to Glasgow; indeed, he was expected there.
The correction was quite a genuine one, necessitated
by an error on the part of the clerk. And that, I
think, finishes the list of enigmas. It was, of course,
Miss Rendall-Smith who sent the other wreath.
And it was Marryatt (I found out by tactful
questioning) who took the copy of Momerie from Reeves’
shelves—he was looking for material for his
evening sermon.</p>

<p>The only problem that remains to me is this—Do
we really know in full the part which Miss
Rendall-Smith plays in the story? Davenant’s
excessive anxiety to keep her out of the whole business
looks to me, I confess, suspicious. But I know
how you distrust theories; and perhaps since
Davenant was content to die in silence it would be
ungenerous to probe further. The police, certainly,
have made no attempt to do so. Reeves has never
called on Miss R.-S., or heard from her.</p>

<p>Reeves himself, meanwhile, is entirely changed for
the better. He has forsworn detective work, and
succeeded in doing the ninth in four. The other
day I actually heard him start a sentence with the
words “When I was a limpet in the War Office,” so
I think there is hope for him yet. I call him
“Mordaunt Reeves, the Converted Detective.”</p>

<p>I hope you will excuse my typewriting this letter;
its inordinate length must be my apology. I hope
we shall see you here again before long, and have
less stirring times together. My wife wishes to be
remembered to you very kindly; her rheumatism
has almost disappeared.</p>

<p class="valediction">Yours sincerely,</p>
<p class="signature">William Carmichael</p>
