<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-GB">
	<head>
		<title>IV</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-4" epub:type="chapter">
			<hgroup>
				<h2 epub:type="ordinal z3998:roman">IV</h2>
				<p epub:type="title">Endless Clues</p>
			</hgroup>
			<p>There is no surer soporific than sleeping over a problem, no more fallacious method of attempting a solution. After murmuring to himself three times, “Let’s see; there was something about watches,” Mordaunt Reeves fell into a sleep which anybody but a psychoanalyst would have called dreamless. He woke in the morning with a strong resolution to do the ninth in four, which melted through lazy stages of half-awareness into the feeling that there was something else to do first. The adventures of yesterday, the duties of today, returned to him. He was already nearly dressed when he remembered that he had decided on the role of a <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily Mail</i> reporter for his morning’s investigation, and grimly set himself to remove again the bulging knickerbockers and the hypocritical garters of his kind. Dressy they might be, but they were not Fleet Street. His memories of the reporter’s wardrobe were, it must be confessed, somewhat disordered, and he was greeted in the breakfast-room with flippant inquiries whether he had gone into mourning for the Unknown Passenger.</p>
			<p>He found Gordon already at table with Marryatt⁠—Marryatt in the high clerical collar which was irreverently known to his intimates as “New every morning.”</p>
			<p>“Well, how are you feeling?” he asked. “You looked rather chippy yesterday. However, I suppose it brings a job of work your way.”</p>
			<p>“Confound it,” said Marryatt, “that’s the trouble. The jury at the inquest are bound to bring in suicide; and then I can’t bury the man in the churchyard, and all the villagers will say I refused out of spite, because the poor old chap used to give these atheist lectures on the village green.”</p>
			<p>“Rot!” said Gordon; “if they do find suicide, they’ll certainly say he was of unsound mind.”</p>
			<p>“Yes,” echoed Reeves, “if they do bring in suicide.”</p>
			<p>“But surely you can’t doubt it,” urged Marryatt energetically. “The man’s just gone bankrupt, and it was an ugly case, from what I hear; several innocent people who’d been fools enough to believe in him left in the cart. At the same time, the smash came very suddenly, and that makes it unlikely that anybody could want to murder the man so soon. Oh, you’ll find it’s suicide right enough.”</p>
			<p>“Well,” said Reeves a little stiffly, “we’re going to do our best to find out between us. I’ve the greatest respect for the police as a body, but I don’t think they’re very good at following up clues. When I was in the Military Intelligence one was constantly putting material at the disposal of the police which they were too supine or too stupid to use.”</p>
			<p>“Well, good luck to your sleuthing; but mark my words, you’ll find it was suicide. I’m going to play a round now to try and take my mind off the thing, but I don’t believe I shall be able to drive at the third after⁠—after what we saw yesterday.”</p>
			<p>Left to themselves, Mordaunt Reeves and Gordon arranged that they would meet again at luncheon and report on the morning’s investigations.</p>
			<p>“And look here,” said Reeves, “it’s a belief of mine that one wants to cover the ground oneself if one’s to visualize the setting of a crime properly. So I vote that after lunch we stroll down to the railway and take a look at the top of that viaduct, and then take the 4.50 from Paston Oatvile to Paston Whitchurch so as to picture the whole thing exactly as it happened.” And so they parted, Reeves walking to Brotherhood’s bungalow, close to Paston Whitchurch station, while Gordon mounted a motor-bicycle and set out for Binver, a sleepy market town of some importance as a railway junction, about twelve miles off.</p>
			<p><abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherhood’s housekeeper, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bramston, had something of the airs of a landlady. She spoke painfully correct English, far more terrible than the native cockney which it half revealed and half concealed. She commenced where others began, closed doors where others shut them, and recollected instead of remembering. Her final consonants were all sibilant, and seemed to form part of the succeeding word. She was a merciless and largely irrelevant talker, and the opportunity of a stranger’s visit delighted her, self-importance easily triumphing over any regret she may have felt for the apparently deceased. She had no doubt that Reeves was a reporter, but it is probable that she would have opened out quite as readily if he had announced himself as the piano-tuner.</p>
			<p>“From the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily Mail</i>? To be sure, sir. I’m always fond of looking at a paper myself, and as for the <i epub:type="se:name.publication.newspaper">Daily Telegraph</i>, I simply revel in it. Called about poor <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood, I suppose; well, there isn’t much doubt what’s come to him, poor soul.⁠ ⁠… Not <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood at all? Don’t you delude yourself, young man; that’s him, sure enough. The police, they wanted me to go and look at the corpse; but I didn’t hardly like to; battered they say it was, something shocking. His clothes? Of course they were his clothes; you don’t think he’d want to be putting somebody else’s clothes on to commit suicide in, do you? That’s the same as he always wore; plain black coat and grey striped trousers, just the same as it was in the papers.⁠ ⁠… What tailor he went to? No, I couldn’t rightly say that; though I’ve had the folding of them many a time; very neat man he was, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood, in his personal habits. Oh, I dare say there’s others as have clothes like his, only you see the way I look at it is, if the clothes were <em>on</em> <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood, then it’s <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood’s clothes they’ll be, that’s the way I look at it.</p>
			<p>“A single gentleman? Yes, a single gentleman he was, single and singular, if you’ll pardon the jeu de mots. Very singular in his habits. Every Saturday off he’d go, just the same as it was in the papers, and where he went to is more than I can say, though I’ve been looking after him the best part of a year now. Every afternoon from Monday to Saturday he’d come home by the five o’clock train, and then he’d go for his round of golf, and I’d have a bit of cold supper ready for him when he came home.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“No, I can’t say that I’ve noticed anything strange about him of late. You see, he was always a very reserved gentleman, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood was; very silent, if you understand what I mean, in conversation.” (Reeves felt that this was probably a characteristic common to most of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bramston’s interlocutors.) “Time and again he’s said to me would I mind leaving him now because he’d got a great deal to do. I recollect about a fortnight ago he did seem rather put out about not being able to find his overcoat when he went out to deliver his address to the villagers; but I found it for him.⁠ ⁠… No, it isn’t much more than two months ago since he commenced exhorting. I never could see what he did it for; not that I go to church myself, but you see the way I look at it is if people want to go to church why not let them go to church? Live and let live, that’s what I say. I shouldn’t call myself a religious woman, mind you, but I like to see everyone go their own way, and not leave tracts. Miss Frobisher she used to come here with tracts, but I said to her, ‘Miss Frobisher,’ I said, ‘you’re wasting your time leaving tracts here,’ and so she was.⁠ ⁠…</p>
			<p>“Mad, sir? Oh dear no, not what you could call mad. Of course we all have our own little ways, haven’t we, sir? and as I was telling you, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood was singular, but not demented; I should never have stopped with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood had he been demented.⁠ ⁠… Suicide? Of course it was suicide; and there’s some say <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Marryatt won’t bury him in holy ground, don’t they? Well, you take my word for it, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Brotherood wouldn’t mind about a little thing like that. Some people seem not to mind <em>what</em> happens to them once they’re gone: <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bramston was like that, while he was spared to me; never seemed to mind if we were to take a spade and bury him in the back garden, that’s the way <em>he</em> looked at it. But of course, I wouldn’t have that, and he was buried properly in holy ground, <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Bramston was, and the minister recited the service over him beautiful.⁠ ⁠… What, must you be going already, sir? Well, I’m sure it’s been a great privilege to me to afford you information. Good morning, sir.”</p>
			<p>This is an abridged account of the interview, but it contains all the material disclosures made by <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bramston. Reeves found himself pitying the coroner who would have to face and to stem that seething torrent of conversation. He came back to the dormy-house to find that it was already nearly time for luncheon, and Gordon was waiting for him, returned from his errand at Binver.</p>
			<p>“Well, have you found out anything?” asked Gordon.</p>
			<p>“Yes,” said Reeves, “I’ve found a wife for Carmichael. I’ve found a woman who could give him a stroke a hole at backchat.” And he launched into a description of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mrs.</abbr> Bramston’s voluminous utterance and her insignificant contribution to the solving of the mystery.</p>
			<p>“Had you any better luck?” he went on.</p>
			<p>“Acting upon instructions received, I proceeded first of all to the offices of <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Messrs.</abbr> Masterman, Formby and Jarrold, Solicitors. It’s one of those jolly old Queen Anne houses facing on the High Street; with a flagged walk up to the front door and blue gates that need painting⁠—or rather, it would spoil them if you did. It’s been turned into an office, and the inside is all musty and smells of decaying paper. The mustiest thing there was the old clerk I went up to and asked if I could see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Masterman. And he said, ‘I’m afraid not, sir; <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Masterman is dead.’ ”</p>
			<p>“Dead? How? When?”</p>
			<p>“My very words. And the old gentleman said, ‘About twenty-three years ago. Would you like to see <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jarrold?’ Well, that did me in rather, because even if old Masterman did bequeath his handkerchiefs to Jarrold, it isn’t likely that old Jarrold would be still using them, though they would about match his furniture if he did.”</p>
			<p>“How did you get out of it? You were rather badly placed.”</p>
			<p>“I was, and I cursed you pretty freely. However, I extricated myself without any heart-to-heart talks with <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Jarrold. I just said, ‘I’m so sorry, I must have made some mistake; this is <em>Doctor</em> Masterman’s house, isn’t it?’ That killed two birds with one stone, I eluded suspicion and also got directed to the other Masterman house, a big house, the man said, at the other end of the water-meadow behind the church.”</p>
			<p>“So you went on there?”</p>
			<p>“No; it occurred to me that a man who lived in a house that size probably kept a manservant or two, and it was up to me to personate one of them. So I went round to the Binver Steam Laundry, where I’m not known personally; and said I was from <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Masterman’s, and could they be kind enough to inform <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Masterman as to what action they intended taking about the twelve last handkerchiefs that hadn’t come back from the wash. That sounds risky, but it wasn’t really, because all men think they’ve more clothes at the wash than they really have. The lady in charge was quite patient and kind, obviously well accustomed to that sort of complaint; she said all <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Dr.</abbr> Masterman’s handkerchiefs had been sent back. Fortunately I bluffed, and insisted upon a search; after a bit she came and put into my hands a pile of handkerchiefs, which I took away with me. There were five of them, four Mastermans and a Brotherhood.”</p>
			<p>“Oh! That rather looks as if⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Exactly; it looks as if we ought to have recognized the touch of the Binver Steam Laundry. In fact, it would be very suspicious in these parts if you found a dead man wearing one of his own handkerchiefs. Well, there seemed no point in keeping any of them, so I dropped the lot into Masterman’s letter-box. Unusual, perhaps, but I felt it would save explanations.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I’m sure we’re all very grateful to <abbr epub:type="z3998:name-title">Mr.</abbr> Gordon for his splendid work among the Mastermen. But it begins to look as if we were left very much where we were. We still don’t even know who the corpse was.”</p>
			<p>There was a knock at the door, and the unwelcome figure of Carmichael obtruded itself. “Sorry if I interrupt,” he said, “but I thought you might be interested in this poor fellow we found yesterday. My caddie this morning was giving me the latest news. It’s extraordinary how these caddies pick up everything except one’s ball.”</p>
			<p>“What news?” gasped Reeves.</p>
			<p>“Well, it seems that Brotherhood was insured at one of these American offices. And they’re a great deal more particular than our own Insurance people. And after all they’re right to be: one’s so apt to think of the Insurance Company as a set of sharks, when in reality they are only protecting the interests of their policyholders.”</p>
			<p>“Granted,” said Gordon. “Proceed.”</p>
			<p>“Well, as soon as they heard of the bankruptcy and then saw the news in the morning paper about the Links Tragedy, the Insurance Company pricked up its ears. Apparently, in the actuarial world, bankruptcy followed by alleged suicide is a matter of daily occurrence, and they have their suspicions. That is why I say they are quite within their rights when they insist upon registering a man by his birthmarks before they insure him. It’s an extraordinary thing about birthmarks; we really know nothing about them⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Nor want to,” said Reeves, “for the time being. What happened?”</p>
			<p>“I was just telling you. A man came down from the Insurance Company to identify the corpse; and my caddie heard about it from⁠—”</p>
			<p>“Heard what?”</p>
			<p>“Why, that it <em>is</em> Brotherhood. They recognized him from the birthmark.”</p>
			<p>“So that’s that,” said Mordaunt Reeves, a little bitterly. “Trust the Insurance people not to make a mistake. I confess that, after the handkerchief clue failed, I had begun to think it must be Brotherhood who was dead. I suppose your caddie didn’t happen to mention whether it was suicide or murder?”</p>
			<p>“He assumed it to be suicide; but not, I think, with any inside information. Of course, it was a foggy day. Did you know that, as a matter of statistics, there are more suicides in November than in any other month?”</p>
			<p>“I will make a note of the fact,” said Mordaunt Reeves.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
